[Amit Varma]: I've reached a stage in my podcasting where I find people more interesting than subjects.
[Amit Varma]: I might be speaking to an expert in this subject or that field.
[Amit Varma]: But my favorite part of the conversation is about the personal journey that my guest has
[Amit Varma]: taken.
[Amit Varma]: I want to know the person behind the work, the evolution towards a view of the world
[Amit Varma]: rather than the view itself, the things that shape them, the things that family and friends
[Amit Varma]: will remember them for, the private moments behind the public work.
[Amit Varma]: I've been lucky in the way that so many of my guests have opened themselves up to me
[Amit Varma]: and in doing so have become more than names on a page or faces on television for all of
[Amit Varma]: you, but real people, flesh and blood people, people with emotional lives and material worries.
[Amit Varma]: When I speak to a historian these days, sure, I want to know the history they have written
[Amit Varma]: about.
[Amit Varma]: But I also like to dig deep into the history of the historian.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a great historian, Ramachandra Guha, making his fifth appearance on the show.
[Amit Varma]: In our first two episodes, we spoke about Mohandas Gandhi and Mahatma Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: Then we did an episode about this republic.
[Amit Varma]: And the last time we chatted, we discussed cricket.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link those episodes on the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: When I came to Bangalore and we decided to record this time, we figured we'll talk about
[Amit Varma]: his new book, Rebels Against Siraj.
[Amit Varma]: But when we met up, Ram was like, Amit, I've been talking about this book so much.
[Amit Varma]: I'm so tired.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, yes, let's just talk about yourself.
[Amit Varma]: I want to get to know you a little better.
[Amit Varma]: So that's what we did.
[Amit Varma]: And I enjoyed it so much, as I'm sure you will as well.
[Amit Varma]: Before we start, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And by now, you know that actual commercials don't come often in this labor of love of
[Amit Varma]: mine.
[Amit Varma]: But so what?
[Amit Varma]: I can still give you public service information.
[Amit Varma]: As I will now.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of Clear Writing.
[Amit Varma]: An online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Ram, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: It's such a pleasure to have you on again.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in our past episodes, we've kind of discussed themes and issues.
[Amit Varma]: We spoke about Gandhi on a couple of episodes, we did an episode for Republic Day where we
[Amit Varma]: spoke about India.
[Amit Varma]: And your last episode was, of course, on the excellent book you wrote and cricket and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to sort of get more into the personal now and get a sense of sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where you come from and what shaped you.
[Amit Varma]: And to begin that, I'll begin by reading out a quotation from Amitabh Kumar's recent book,
[Amit Varma]: which came out, which really spoke to me.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a question at the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: And he's talking about Rahim Azam Raza's story, Aadha Gaon.
[Amit Varma]: And he's talking about this incident where this bunch of well educated Muslim students
[Amit Varma]: go to a village to tell the Muslims there that there's going to be partition and you
[Amit Varma]: come to Pakistan with us.
[Amit Varma]: And this is Amitabh's quote where he writes, in Raza's Aadha Gaon, the protest against
[Amit Varma]: the nation is being made in the name of the village, when the fiercely well-educated Muslim
[Amit Varma]: students come to Bengali to preach about partition and the necessity for the creation of a new
[Amit Varma]: nation of Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: The Muslim villagers are genuinely bewildered.
[Amit Varma]: One of the villagers is a young man called Tanu, who has returned from battle fighting
[Amit Varma]: for the British in the Second World War.
[Amit Varma]: He argues against the urban visitors in the name of his village.
[Amit Varma]: And now these are Tanu's words.
[Amit Varma]: He says, I am a Muslim, but I love this village because I myself am this village.
[Amit Varma]: I love the indigo warehouse, this tank and these mud lanes because they are different
[Amit Varma]: forms of myself.
[Amit Varma]: On the battlefield, when death came very near, I certainly remembered Allah, instead of Mecca
[Amit Varma]: or Karbala, I remembered Gangauli, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I found this beautiful and moving.
[Amit Varma]: And a question that I asked Amitabh and that I'll now turn to you is, what is your Gangauli?
[Amit Varma]: And when I when I mean, what is your sense of home?
[Amit Varma]: One, I asked this question, because I myself feel that I can't place a sense of home in
[Amit Varma]: terms of geography.
[Amit Varma]: I know where I was born, I know where I grew up and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But when I think of it in an impressionistic way, it will be people the way they speak
[Amit Varma]: the thing, maybe sitting in a living room, sometimes things, things that bring me comfort,
[Amit Varma]: but a lot of things which have since dissipated, and Amitabh had a similar sort of sense of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Where is your Gangauli, I'm not asking you for a specific place.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not even asking for a biological recounting or an intellectual, I'm asking more for an
[Amit Varma]: sort of an impressionistic account of what are the things and places and memories that
[Amit Varma]: feel to you like home?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I'll answer it in a slightly long winded way.
[Guest]: You know, Amit, the last time we met, we spoke about cricket, and I grew up with cricket.
[Guest]: But the older I've got, and it may seem heretical to say this to some of my friends and readers,
[Guest]: Hindustani classical music has replaced cricket as my first and main and greatest passion.
[Guest]: And every evening, I listen to a lot of music.
[Guest]: Before I give a talk, not a nice, informal conversation like the one I'm having with
[Guest]: you, but some, you know, stayed serious academic talk, I listen to music.
[Guest]: And quite often, the composition of my choice before a talk I give is Kumar Gandhar's Jamuna
[Guest]: Kinare Mero Gaon.
[Guest]: And that appeals to me because there is only one Kumar Gandhar, it's short enough to, you
[Guest]: know, you don't have to listen to a whole khayal of one hour before going in for a meeting.
[Guest]: And because I realized much later, I mean, it's a really beautiful composition.
[Guest]: It's also been sung by Mukulshree Putra, his son, by Prabha Aitare, TM Krishna, very recently
[Guest]: he has started singing it.
[Guest]: And also in his own very distinctive and fine way.
[Guest]: But Kumarji is, as Krishna would agree, somewhere up there.
[Guest]: But I've been thinking about why that matters to me so much.
[Guest]: And it's not just the music, it's not just Kumar Gandhar.
[Guest]: It is because Jamuna Kinare Mero Gaon.
[Guest]: I was born in the watershed of the Jamuna, not in a village, in a place called the Forest
[Guest]: Research Institute, which was set up in the early 20th century by the British.
[Guest]: And where my father and grandfather both worked as scientists.
[Guest]: They were not members of the Forest Service.
[Guest]: Had they been, they would have come on deputation.
[Guest]: They were research scientists running the wood laboratories there.
[Guest]: My maternal grandfather, my father, I was born there, my mother was born there.
[Guest]: And it's on the watershed.
[Guest]: So by home, we lived in a series of homes on the watershed of a river called Tans, or
[Guest]: as they would say in the local dialect, Tans.
[Guest]: And Tans is a very common name for a villager in that part of Garhwal.
[Guest]: And the Tans joined the Asan, which joined the Jamuna.
[Guest]: So actually, that's among the reasons I'm so attached to the song, I suppose, subliminally.
[Guest]: He said I was born in Dehradun in 1958, when it was still part of Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: The creation of Uttarakhand was for decades and more in the future.
[Guest]: Very beautiful wooded campus with 400 species of birds, lots of playgrounds, friends to
[Guest]: hang out with, play cricket with, smoke cigarettes with, listen to music with.
[Guest]: So in a sense, Dehradun, and particularly the Forest Research Institute, is my gow.
[Guest]: I often dream about it.
[Guest]: It's one part of the town that has not been disfigured by the changes in the last 30 or
[Guest]: 40 years.
[Guest]: And yes, so I'm Uttarakhandi by birth, Tamil by blood, Bangalore by domicile, Kolkata in
[Guest]: terms of my education and intellectual formation.
[Guest]: But I do feel a deep attachment to Dehradun and the campus of the Forest Research Institute,
[Guest]: and the woods and valleys and rivers and birds and trees of that landscape, an attachment
[Guest]: that is much deeper than I have to any other place.
[Amit Varma]: And when you say you dream about it, do you dream about being young in it or do you dream
[Guest]: about it now?
[Guest]: I dream about walks in it.
[Guest]: I mean, not so much, I have some very interesting dreams.
[Guest]: I mean, I wonder whether we chatted about this before, but I have dreamt, this is deviating
[Guest]: from what you want to talk about.
[Guest]: But I want to deviate from everything.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: Now, so I dream about Dehradun, particularly the FRI, but also other parts.
[Amit Varma]: You were telling me this dream.
[Guest]: You were telling me this dream.
[Guest]: I'm going to tell you about the dream now in a minute.
[Guest]: A particular dream, which tells you about my attachment, also about problems writers
[Guest]: have when we write books and want to shape society, is that in 2014, in the month of
[Guest]: April, I was in the city of Houston in Texas, going to speak about the second volume of
[Guest]: my Gandhi biography at a wonderful independent bookstore in Houston.
[Guest]: And that night, this is March or April 2014, I had this dream, you know, elections were
[Guest]: coming.
[Guest]: The Congress was discredited.
[Guest]: I had a lifelong detestation of the BJP and Hindutva.
[Guest]: I had seen Modi in operation in Gujarat.
[Guest]: I had no illusions about him.
[Guest]: And I dreamt, I can't remember the exact date, but about March or April 2014, I dreamt that
[Guest]: I was going to contest elections on behalf of the Aamadhi Party.
[Guest]: Okay, now I had two dreams.
[Guest]: I first dreamt that I thought that I have to, at that stage, the Aamadhi Party had a
[Guest]: certain romantic aura about it, my friend Yogendra Yadav had joined it, and I saw other
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: And I dreamt that I was going to join and fight from Jharadun.
[Guest]: And in my dream, you know, the landscape of Jharadun, the Eastern Valley with the Khano
[Guest]: Forest and the Western Valley with the Jamuna and, you know, Ashokanidhi, Kalsi, all that
[Guest]: was coming in my dream.
[Guest]: And I said, I have to fight.
[Guest]: It's all happened in the dream.
[Guest]: And Pratap Bhanu Mehta, who is a notoriously austere, reclusive intellectual, as far from
[Guest]: the world of combat as anyone could be, told me, Ram, I am thinking of fighting from Jaipur,
[Guest]: you should fight from Jharadun.
[Guest]: Okay, now, this is, I got up in the middle of the night, and it was like 2am.
[Guest]: And I was like kind of gobsmacked.
[Guest]: And so I called my wife.
[Guest]: And she said, you're jet lagged and weary, just go back to sleep.
[Guest]: I went back to sleep in April 2014.
[Guest]: And I had a second dream that night, in which again, I was considering joining the Aam Aadmi
[Guest]: Party to fight for Jharadun.
[Guest]: And this time, the person encouraging me to throw my hat in the ring was my esteemed elder
[Guest]: colleague Rajmohan Gandhi, who had actually decided to fight on Aam Aadmi ticket from
[Guest]: East Delhi.
[Guest]: So it was even much more credible than Pratap.
[Guest]: So I got up, I called my friend Kesar Desi Raju, the late Kesar Desi Raju, the biographer,
[Guest]: and I said, Ram, you've been away too long now.
[Guest]: So then I lay awake from Houston, I flew to, I gave my talk, then I flew to San Francisco.
[Guest]: And I decided, it's not my cup of tea, you know, I mean, I'm a writer and I write books.
[Guest]: And obviously, I can't shape society in the way a politician can.
[Guest]: I can't really improve people's lives in the way a doctor or teacher can.
[Guest]: But what I can do, I will do honestly and sincerely, and disregard the dream, the dream
[Guest]: went out of the window.
[Guest]: Now, that is 2014.
[Guest]: In 2019, February, I was in this city where we are talking, Bangalore, alone, my wife
[Guest]: and children were out of town.
[Guest]: And I dreamt again that the 2019 election is coming.
[Guest]: And you know, the BJP and Modi had consolidated itself further.
[Guest]: The social fabric was being torn apart.
[Guest]: I had written the book that we are going to discuss a little bit, I had written a draft,
[Guest]: I had no other intellectual ambitions.
[Guest]: And I had a dream saying, I'm going to fight again from Dehradun.
[Guest]: And again, the landscape came alive for me.
[Guest]: And this time, my wife was overseas.
[Guest]: So at 2am, it was like 6pm in London, I called her.
[Guest]: And she said, if you pursue that dream, I will divorce you.
[Guest]: So I went back and in that dream, I even had a kind of, you know, in between my waking
[Guest]: hours, my sleeping hours, I even realized that I'll have an interesting time.
[Guest]: I'll never win.
[Guest]: But I'll see parts of the valley that I have not seen.
[Guest]: And I would even, I would do what the very great writer, Maria Vargas Luz had done, Porter
[Guest]: election had lost, and I would get a book out of it.
[Guest]: And I even had a title for that book, Doomed in the Dune, a middle aged writer's quixotic
[Guest]: dream to change and failed dream to change his country.
[Guest]: So I think what these dreams tell you is two things.
[Guest]: One is the sense of inadequacy any writer who writes on politics and society does that
[Guest]: he's merely documenting, interpreting, analyzing, reflecting, but he's not really changing anyone's
[Guest]: lives.
[Guest]: So that I think is something and writers can compensate for it in different ways, sometimes
[Guest]: they join a political party, and so on.
[Guest]: And the other thing it tells you about is the answer to your question is, though I left
[Guest]: Dehradun in 1984, when my father retired, that is still my town.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to take you upon that you realized at this point, you told yourself that hey,
[Amit Varma]: writers can't change society, writers can't shape society, right.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the realizations that has come to me as I have reached my late 40s, and something
[Amit Varma]: that I discussed, I've discussed with guests on the show, is our changing conceptions of
[Amit Varma]: time, that when you're 20, it looks like 25 is a long way away, 30 is an old man, right.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, when you look back in the past, the past seems distant, it's another country
[Amit Varma]: as the cliche goes, right.
[Amit Varma]: So you look at, say, the 1857 mutiny, and it's like a century and a half ago, from that
[Amit Varma]: vantage point, but then the decades just quickly pass in your own life.
[Amit Varma]: And you realize that shit in the blink of an eye, like a friend of mine uses very resonant
[Amit Varma]: phrase yesterday, when I was having coffee with him, where he said that the days are
[Amit Varma]: long, but the years are short, you know, and that struck a chord with me about how quickly
[Amit Varma]: time really moves, though it sometimes may not seem that way.
[Amit Varma]: And what that also then made me realize is that what seemed like distant history was
[Amit Varma]: not distant history after all, you know, if 20 years in my own life have passed in the
[Amit Varma]: blink of an eye, then 60 years in a country's history is also the blink of an eye.
[Amit Varma]: And when I take that step back and look at things with that perspective, it seems to
[Amit Varma]: me that as in my life, in the history of people, because history is just a lot of collected
[Amit Varma]: lives like that, a lot of things that happen happen by accident, they are kind of happenstance.
[Amit Varma]: It's very tempting to later look back and put narratives and think of it in a teleological
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: But there's so much accident, so much randomness.
[Amit Varma]: So when going back to your phrase of writers cannot shape society, you know, what shapes
[Amit Varma]: society like, is it just accident?
[Amit Varma]: Number one, what shapes societies is it?
[Amit Varma]: Is it accident?
[Amit Varma]: Is it a class of people who shape it more than others?
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, what is then the role of intellectuals like do you believe that in the long arc,
[Amit Varma]: you know, intellectuals, public intellectuals can make changes in small and unseen ways
[Amit Varma]: that they may not realize at the time, but they have to believe in the long game and
[Guest]: keep on playing it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So first of all, I mean, chance and contingency plays a very important role in history, but
[Guest]: also in the life of the historian.
[Guest]: I mean, we can talk about that later, if you wish, how I became a historian was a series
[Guest]: of absolutely random accidents.
[Guest]: But you know, I think what really changes society much more than the ideas of a historian
[Guest]: or sociologist are the inventions of a scientist and an engineer.
[Guest]: You know, I think this is one of Karl Marx's great insights, that no technology is an autonomous
[Guest]: social force.
[Guest]: You know, what the laptop or the computer has done to you.
[Guest]: I mean, Marx understood what the steam engine and the railway line were doing and the large
[Guest]: factory were doing to transform social relations in good and bad.
[Guest]: You know, but again, I have a lifelong engagement with Marx, not with Marxists and communists
[Guest]: who I've increasingly come to dislike and detest almost as much as I detest the Hindu
[Guest]: right, not as much, but almost as much.
[Guest]: But Marx was a great visual thinker and got some things very right about technology, for
[Guest]: example.
[Guest]: He got some things wrong.
[Guest]: One of the things he got wrong was in his inversion of Feuerbach's thesis, when Feuerbach
[Guest]: said, you know, when in his thesis on Feuerbach, he said, Marx said famously, philosophers
[Guest]: have hitherto interpreted the world.
[Guest]: The task, however, is to change it.
[Guest]: And Marx saw himself as a philosopher changing the world.
[Guest]: Lenin saw himself as a philosopher changing the world.
[Guest]: Mao saw himself possibly to some extent as a philosopher changing the world, right.
[Guest]: And you know, and so on, also, and I think I don't think that I think the job of a thinker
[Guest]: is to interpret, to analyze it, interpret it using his tools, his analysis, his research,
[Guest]: his autonomy, his independence of judgment, all of that.
[Guest]: What other people make of it is their business.
[Guest]: Now, it's important that the several things that are important in doing your job truthfully
[Guest]: and honestly, if you're an intellectual.
[Guest]: One is, of course, absolute independence on political parties, you may have a philosophy
[Guest]: and ideology, you may be on the left, but don't join the Communist Party, you may be
[Guest]: on the right, but don't join the BJP and above all, never be seen with politicians in public
[Guest]: and have your photographs taken with politicians or have dinner with them and so on.
[Guest]: But the other thing that's really, I think, very important is grouplessness to academic
[Guest]: fidelity, rigor of research, you know, scrutinizing your sources from different points of view.
[Guest]: And then for a historian, someone in the humanities more broadly, writing excessively and clearly
[Guest]: for a wider audience.
[Guest]: I think that's very, very important because history and anthropology are two disciplines
[Guest]: in which the complexity and depth of the research and the nuance of the argument can be expressed
[Guest]: in everyday language, you do not have to dumb down, unlike a mathematician or a physicist
[Guest]: or a geneticist, who will have to, who cannot convey the complexity of his findings and
[Guest]: the depth of his research to you and me without using technical language.
[Guest]: So I think these are things that guide me in my work.
[Guest]: I myself do, I mean, one should not, everyone has the right to look at somebody else as
[Guest]: they want.
[Guest]: So if you call me a public intellectual, I won't tell you not to call me a public intellectual,
[Guest]: but I never call myself a public intellectual.
[Guest]: I think a public intellectual is a misleading term, it's a pompous term, it's a self-regarding
[Guest]: term.
[Guest]: You can call me a historian and writer, you can say historian and cricket writer, historian
[Guest]: and environmental writer, historian and columnist, all that is fine.
[Guest]: But public intellectual is a term I personally don't like.
[Amit Varma]: Many stands in there, like one of course, I'll double down on what you said about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, that writers don't have to dumb it down.
[Amit Varma]: And when I teach my writing course, I tell everyone that as far as your prose is concerned,
[Amit Varma]: you have to keep the reader in mind, make sure that you know, many of us when we write
[Amit Varma]: into our laptops, we imagine that the job of writing is to get what is in your head
[Amit Varma]: out on the laptop.
[Amit Varma]: And what I am at pains to explain is no, you have to have the intended effect on the intended
[Amit Varma]: reader.
[Amit Varma]: So she has to be at the forefront of your consideration.
[Amit Varma]: But while you tailor your prose for the reader, you never tailor your content in that way.
[Amit Varma]: Your content is what it is, you never compromise, you never dumb it down.
[Amit Varma]: And it is possible to write like that.
[Amit Varma]: Now that leads me to think that on the one hand, you say that the job of a historian
[Amit Varma]: is to write history.
[Amit Varma]: But it also seems that this imperative for clarity comes because you want this history
[Amit Varma]: to reach more people to make it to the discourse.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there is another purpose.
[Amit Varma]: It is not just writing history for the sake of history.
[Amit Varma]: But it is writing history because it is good for society, in a sense, right?
[Guest]: So I would say good for society.
[Guest]: I mean, it's one wants as many people as possible to read what you write.
[Guest]: So my 1990 newspaper column comes in 10 languages.
[Guest]: It comes in not all the major Indian languages, but most of them.
[Guest]: And if you want your writing in English to be understood in Bangla or in Urdu, you can't
[Guest]: write like a French postmodern theorist, or an Indian postmodern theorist.
[Guest]: I won't take any names, but the kind of people I have in mind, right?
[Guest]: And I think that's, I think, very, very important.
[Guest]: I mean, in some ways, the most curious compliment I've ever got was when I wrote an essay in
[Guest]: the EPW many years ago, I think it was in 1996.
[Guest]: It was a critique of the linguistic turn in subaltern studies.
[Guest]: Subaltern studies, as many of your listeners will know, was a school of history writing
[Guest]: talking about the oppressed people, peasants, workers, adivasis, and so on, and documenting
[Guest]: their lives.
[Guest]: It was social history at its finest when it began, and then it became postmodern, navel-gazing,
[Guest]: critique of colonial power, kind of second-rate literary criticism.
[Guest]: So I wrote a piece, which was an analysis of this, which I called Subaltern and Bhadralog
[Guest]: Studies, how subaltern studies had become Bhadralog Studies.
[Guest]: And I bumped into a JNU professor at the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
[Guest]: He liked my piece.
[Guest]: And he told me, you know, I read your piece in the latest EPW.
[Guest]: I really liked it.
[Guest]: And I gave it to my students to read.
[Guest]: And then he added, I gave it to my students to read, and I told them, don't be confused
[Guest]: by how well it's written.
[Guest]: It's still saying important things.
[Guest]: That's the most curious, bizarre compliment I've ever got.
[Guest]: Don't be confused by how well it's written.
[Guest]: It's still saying important things, which means JNU students are taught, if it's clear
[Guest]: and accessible and readable and eloquent, it's not important.
[Guest]: So I think it's a commentary on what we made of scholarly writing, and this was not true
[Guest]: in the past.
[Guest]: I mean, certainly historians, even the sociologists I've admired, always wrote clearly.
[Guest]: I mean, M. N. Srinivas, I mean, I didn't agree always with what he wrote, but he expressed
[Guest]: complex ideas in such clear prose.
[Guest]: So I think that is something, and of course, the older you get, maybe your prose gets less
[Guest]: clunky.
[Guest]: In my case, this is an argument I have with my son, Keshav, and with younger people.
[Guest]: I believe printing out drafts is important, and correcting a piece of paper with a pen
[Guest]: is important.
[Guest]: I think that's something I do even with a newspaper column.
[Guest]: I think that's, for young writers, as I said, my son disagrees, and maybe some of your writing
[Guest]: people will also disagree with me, but I believe it's very important to print out drafts and
[Guest]: go over them with a pen, set them aside.
[Guest]: In my case, I probably think, and I can't explain this, I mean, I think a lifetime of
[Guest]: listening to music has probably made my prose clear.
[Guest]: I can't explain how, why this is so, and how this is so, but I think that's probably part
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: It is true that a historian, because he writes about real people, a historian would write
[Guest]: in a more accessible, everyday language than a philosopher would.
[Guest]: So it's a privilege, it's a rare privilege that historians enjoy.
[Guest]: They are not truly original in their thought in the way a philosopher or a mathematician
[Guest]: or a physicist is, and I have no illusions in that regard, I mean, they are those three,
[Guest]: I mean, philosophers, mathematicians and physicists are, top biologists are at a different level
[Guest]: of intellectual achievement than historians.
[Guest]: But at least what they find, they can reach out to a wide audience and they must make
[Amit Varma]: every attempt.
[Amit Varma]: So couple of themes I want to kind of double click on.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of them, like, first of all, I'll tell you in what manner I use the phrase
[Amit Varma]: public intellectual and why it fits and why in fact, you validated my argument for using
[Amit Varma]: that phrase and what you just said, which is that by making your writing clear and accessible
[Amit Varma]: in a way that other historians don't, you are making it public, you're reaching out
[Amit Varma]: to more people, right?
[Amit Varma]: And and of course, your subject is intellectual.
[Amit Varma]: So I use it purely those words in that functional sense without the other connotations that
[Amit Varma]: come in with fancy phrases like that.
[Amit Varma]: And the first theme I want to double click on is therefore a theme of the changing relevance
[Amit Varma]: of academia.
[Amit Varma]: Like in the past, what would happen is that you would have the academic world and you
[Amit Varma]: would have a world of elites and their ideas.
[Amit Varma]: And the rest of the world when the world is much poorer 19th century, much of the 20th
[Amit Varma]: century, the rest of the world is getting on with life, while all your intellectual
[Amit Varma]: discourse and your intellectual life is happening among the elites.
[Amit Varma]: Today, I think across various sort of fields and industries and whatever the main mainstreams
[Amit Varma]: have dissipated, everything has become democratized and the access is much more open.
[Amit Varma]: Net net, I think it's a fantastic thing.
[Amit Varma]: There are of course, counter effects and you know, one can see that there are some bugs
[Amit Varma]: along with the features.
[Amit Varma]: But net net, I think it's a fantastic thing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what are the implications of this for academia, because I think what is happening
[Amit Varma]: is like we were discussing earlier at lunch today, that there is a great hunger among
[Amit Varma]: people among young people for history.
[Amit Varma]: My history episodes are always really popular, a writer like Manu Pillay has a cult following,
[Amit Varma]: because he speaks in, you know, eloquent and clear language to those people and makes history
[Amit Varma]: come alive with the stories that he tells.
[Amit Varma]: Now there is that hunger for it with people, the mass of people who would otherwise have
[Amit Varma]: been living lives of quiet desperation and trying to earn their next meal, want to engage
[Amit Varma]: in the world of ideas and get to know all of this.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that will reshape academia?
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that will, you know, make academia irrelevant?
[Amit Varma]: And is there a sense of now, you know, one class of people becoming irrelevant, who are
[Amit Varma]: writing their postmodernist language and who are following their fashions of academia?
[Amit Varma]: And another mass class of people coming up, saying that I don't need to have a PhD to
[Amit Varma]: do what I'm doing, you know, I will convince you and win you over with the quality of my
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: So, I mean, obviously, it's not black and white.
[Guest]: And there are certain subjects which require rigorous, historical subjects require rigorous
[Guest]: academic training, require years and years of work in the archives, you can't write them
[Guest]: on the basis of secondary sources, they require knowledge of many different languages.
[Guest]: And the popular historians of today may or may not have those.
[Guest]: But they are answering a real need, and which is why it's important for academics to step
[Guest]: out of writing only for their peers, and writing for a wider audience, because then they can
[Guest]: bring their training, their rigor, you know, I mean, the greatest Indian historian alive
[Guest]: and is Sanjay Subramanian.
[Guest]: And he's a wonderful writer, too.
[Guest]: He doesn't write turgid prose, he writes very accessible, often eloquent prose.
[Guest]: But he hesitates writing for a wider audience.
[Guest]: I don't know why.
[Guest]: And I've talked to him about it.
[Guest]: But he knows much more about medieval India, about European expansion, than 500 of the
[Guest]: popular historians combined, or about South India, history of South India, then, but I
[Guest]: wish people like him would come out and take their knowledge to a wider audience, as many
[Guest]: great foreign historians have done, you know, you know, British historians, particularly,
[Guest]: I mean, think of Linda Colley, who's just written a very big book, which I'm looking
[Guest]: forward to read, which I haven't on the history of constitutions.
[Guest]: Okay, now, that's not someone, you know, a general consumer of popular history will read
[Guest]: because it's complex, it's difficult, it's about large ideas, it's not about kings and
[Guest]: queens and battles, which is what you want to read about, right?
[Guest]: So but it's a major historical subject, you know, comparative history of constitutions.
[Guest]: But she's written in a way in which if you are willing to, you know, take the trouble,
[Guest]: you will read it.
[Guest]: And a very important difference in this regard, distinction in this regard, I mean, is not
[Guest]: between scholarly history and popular history, we can talk about that.
[Guest]: It's between scholarly publishers and trade publishers.
[Guest]: So Linda Colley, who is one of the historians I greatly admire, who's written three or four
[Guest]: landmark works of scholarship, the depth of our research, you will not find in popular
[Guest]: history, either in this country or in Britain or America, but she publishes her books, not
[Guest]: through Harvard University Press and Cambridge University Press, but through Penguin or Harper.
[Guest]: So I think that's where people need to go.
[Guest]: Some people are going down that route now.
[Guest]: I think some ancient historians, you know, Nanjot Lahiri and Upindar Singh being two
[Guest]: excellent examples who are writing now for a wider audience, and bringing that depth
[Guest]: of scholarship available and accessible.
[Guest]: So while popular history has its place, often, it's about a particular kinds of subjects,
[Guest]: you know, it's as I said, kings and queens and rich men, you know, and that is only part
[Guest]: of history, the great worth of subaltern studies was to shine a spotlight on obscure, working
[Guest]: class people who don't leave a written record of their work, you know, I think that's whose
[Guest]: lives you have to reconstruct by using all kinds of fugitive sources spread all over
[Guest]: the place.
[Guest]: So I think it is a challenge that I think the growing hunger that readers have for history
[Guest]: is a challenge the professional historian must respond to, and must not vacate the space
[Guest]: for people who may lack, you know, the rigor, the training, and are filling the space because
[Guest]: the professional historian is only writing for his or her peers.
[Guest]: I think that's a challenge that I wish more people would would embrace.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I think, as for any other field, Sturgeon's law applies to this.
[Amit Varma]: Now Sturgeon's law is that 95% of everything is crap, which will happen in history writing
[Amit Varma]: also.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that that 5% is a space that a newcomer can fill, yes, provided they show
[Amit Varma]: the rigor, but a professional historian will already have the training and the rigor.
[Amit Varma]: And just by, you know, not condescending to the mass public by saying that, hey, we want
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, by reaching out, and by taking the public and public intellectual seriously,
[Guest]: because it's an honor.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: History is a branch of social science and a branch of literature, you know, it is a
[Guest]: branch of literature. And I think that's something I wish more professional historians would
[Guest]: take.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the next big theme that I said I'd explore, which came from what you were saying earlier,
[Amit Varma]: was when you spoke about how you print something out, and you underline each thing and you
[Amit Varma]: said that your son might find it ridiculous.
[Amit Varma]: I don't find it ridiculous.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not just because of my age.
[Amit Varma]: It's also because that I think that what that does that process does when you print something
[Amit Varma]: out is that it slows down your consideration of what you have written, where you're not
[Amit Varma]: scrolling on a screen, you're going slowly over the printed page with a pen and underlining
[Amit Varma]: parts and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that helps.
[Amit Varma]: And I have wanted to ask you, and this is a much larger question about the rhythms of
[Amit Varma]: life, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, you know, today, many people live their lives in a rhythm, if you think
[Amit Varma]: about it, which is very frenetic, which is choppy, which is like staccato, duck, duck,
[Amit Varma]: duck, duck, Twitter, check your Instagram, check your Facebook, check, yeah, yeah, okay,
[Amit Varma]: I'll talk, talk, talk, talk, you go on from one thing to the other.
[Amit Varma]: There is no tariff.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, you could say that if our life was to be mimicked in prose, it would be fragmented
[Amit Varma]: sentences and not, you know, beautiful, elegant, long sentences, which are building their own
[Amit Varma]: slow rhythm and building their ease.
[Amit Varma]: So I had sort of a number of questions kind of based on this about just these rhythms
[Amit Varma]: of life.
[Amit Varma]: And one, I want to ask you about sort of the rhythms of life, when you were growing up
[Amit Varma]: in your past, and what you find the difference now, and what you do to insulate yourself
[Amit Varma]: from the temptations of falling into this kind of modern rhythm, where you feel you're
[Amit Varma]: doing a lot, but it's all shallow, you're getting nothing done.
[Amit Varma]: And, and it is in this context, that I find what you said illuminating about taking a
[Amit Varma]: printout and going through something, because what are you doing, you're slowing down that
[Guest]: rhythm, and you're giving more consideration.
[Guest]: It's possible that even writing directly on the screen, though, it's so easy and accessible,
[Guest]: you will take a printout, there's a way you can slow it down further is writing by hand.
[Guest]: I wrote my first book by hand, actually my first two or three books by hand I wrote,
[Guest]: and then I would either type it or give it to a typist.
[Guest]: I have friends who still write books by hand, you know, the historian David Gilmour, who
[Guest]: is a wonderful historian of colonial India, and has also written on Italy, writes by hand.
[Guest]: If you read Darwin's autobiography, it's a gem of literature completely written by hand,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So I, of course, on the other hand, it is I mean, I have some, I mean, I wouldn't want
[Guest]: to appear absolutely old fashioned, I think it is sometimes easy to revise on screen,
[Guest]: there would be writers who turn out brilliant first drafts, just based on the screen, and
[Guest]: you know, going down, young people get accustomed to different rhythms.
[Guest]: But on reflection, I think I was very lucky that I was born before the age even of television,
[Guest]: because there are those who had no television till I was 20.
[Guest]: So let alone the internet, let alone the smartphone.
[Guest]: So the radio was very important, reading was very important, walks were very important,
[Guest]: and conversation was very important.
[Guest]: You know, and I think these four kind of elements of life, the radio has disappeared as a medium
[Guest]: of instruction and education, podcasts, fortunately, to some extent, are now compensating for it
[Guest]: for younger Indians.
[Guest]: But radio has gone, reading is now in bytes, walks have been replaced by gym work, right?
[Guest]: And I still walk, I go to Covent Park, I don't like the gym, right?
[Guest]: And conversation, long extended conversations without people looking at their phone.
[Guest]: So I think I was lucky in that sense that the rhythms of my life were determined very
[Guest]: early on, without a dependence on such things, you know, which of course are great and convenient
[Guest]: and aid you and use you.
[Guest]: And when I write, I never have my phone with me.
[Guest]: I would like not to be connected to the internet.
[Guest]: But that I don't do because the internet is valuable for fact checking.
[Guest]: But if I was a novelist, I'm sure Keshavar is not committed, rightly so, not connected
[Guest]: to the internet while he's composing a chapter of a novel.
[Guest]: I don't look at Twitter after 11 a.m., whatever happens.
[Guest]: Somebody tells me, you know, Russia has invaded Ukraine at 3 p.m., I might go to the news,
[Guest]: go to the BBC website and look at it, right?
[Guest]: So I think obviously, these are things one has to learn.
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, I deeply appreciate the benefits that technology has brought about.
[Guest]: But writing is something that takes place over the long haul, sometimes the very long
[Guest]: haul.
[Guest]: So my new book, Rebels Against the Raj, has been in the making more than 20 years.
[Guest]: I wrote a biography of Elvin, which is very relevant, The Anthropologist, which was published
[Guest]: in 1999.
[Guest]: And Elvin, who was an Oxford-trained anthropologist who became a caller and advocate for Indian
[Guest]: Adivasi people and was close to Gandhi and Nehru, had one abiding regret, which was he
[Guest]: never went to jail.
[Guest]: And so when I finished my biography of Elvin in 1999, I thought, let me write a companion
[Guest]: volume, a group portrait of seven or eight people.
[Guest]: And I gave a series of lectures in Nehu, in the Northeastern Hilly University in 2001,
[Guest]: called The Other Side of the Raj, where I portrayed 14 or 15 such people.
[Guest]: And 20 years later, this book has come out, because I did other things, but it was always
[Guest]: in the back of my mind.
[Guest]: So I was always gathering material, thinking about it, winnowing down my list of 14 people
[Guest]: to seven, focusing on them, finding ways of getting new material on them.
[Guest]: So writing books is about the long haul.
[Guest]: You know, it's really, it's something which often germinates in your mind over decades,
[Guest]: if you are fortunate to live long enough.
[Guest]: And I think that's something, that's the kind of rhythm, and I'm sorry to revive an old
[Guest]: debate between you and me, that's the rhythm that comes naturally to a lover of test cricket
[Guest]: and not to a lover of 2020.
[Amit Varma]: I love test cricket too, and I'm not going to argue about that.
[Amit Varma]: One you know, it's very interesting, and it's something I think I've written about also
[Amit Varma]: the difference between writing by hand and writing on the computer.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a very fundamental thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's there is a trade off.
[Amit Varma]: And there is the trade off is the speed and convenience of writing something on the laptop.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, the greater consideration that you put upon your thoughts and your writing
[Amit Varma]: when you're forced to write slowly.
[Amit Varma]: And I think individuals have to kind of figure that trade off for themselves, except that
[Amit Varma]: many young people today have perhaps not written by hand at all.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, one doesn't know how that sort of goes.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I am struck by something that would seem to contradict our mutual appreciation of slow
[Amit Varma]: rhythms, which is something that your favorite editor Rukun Advani said about you, where
[Amit Varma]: he once said, quote, Ram Guha was from the word go rather like an unstoppable force of
[Amit Varma]: volcano spilling over with more ideas for books, and he wanted to write, then his brain
[Amit Varma]: was able to contain, stop quote, slow, a slightly unconventional question.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a picture of your brain, when you were a young person, and what's going on through
[Amit Varma]: it?
[Amit Varma]: Like how much activity is there?
[Amit Varma]: Is there foment?
[Amit Varma]: Did you daydream a lot?
[Amit Varma]: What did you think about in your free time?
[Guest]: All of that?
[Guest]: I think all Rukun is describing, Rukun got to know me when I was 25 or 26.
[Guest]: And my life changed dramatically between the ages of 21 and 25.
[Guest]: From four to 21, I was obsessed with playing cricket, from the age of four, till the age
[Guest]: of 21.
[Guest]: And I read occasionally, and I come from a family of reader of not of readers, but of
[Guest]: literate people.
[Guest]: And I had friends in college who introduced me to novels.
[Guest]: And so I read, you know, some of the well known novelists of the day, I listen to music,
[Guest]: I did other things.
[Guest]: But I had no intellectual interest at all, till by accident, I discovered the works of
[Guest]: Eddie Redmayne.
[Guest]: And in the year 1978, Rukun Advani, who was in college with me for three years, he was
[Guest]: two years senior to me, he did an MA, so we overlapped for three years, we stayed for
[Guest]: three years in the same small self enclosed community of males, and never exchanged a
[Guest]: word with one another, because Rukun had contempt for sports people, which he kind of hints
[Guest]: at in his essay on me, which is why when I met him five years after he graduated, and
[Guest]: I by accident at a mutual friend's wedding, and I told him I'd completed a PhD on Zipco
[Guest]: movement, he thought this guy's gone mad.
[Guest]: And then it took him a long time to understand that a genuine kind of transformation had
[Guest]: taken place, which took place in Kolkata, where I went for a PhD at the Indian Institute
[Guest]: of Management, a strange place to be doing a PhD in sociology.
[Guest]: But I was fortunate there to be mentored by a very remarkable teacher called Anjan Ghosh,
[Guest]: who's no longer alive, who really shaped me intellectually in all kinds of ways, and which
[Guest]: is why I continue to write for the Telegraph of Kolkata, because I owe Kolkata a second
[Guest]: chance in life.
[Guest]: Kolkata gave me a chance to explore the world of ideas and research.
[Guest]: So it's from then, maybe I was making up all those years when I was playing cricket.
[Guest]: Ever since then, I've always had many ideas, so always have three or four book projects
[Guest]: in my mind.
[Guest]: And the days before Rukun became so reclusive, I would meet him or call him and, you know,
[Guest]: bombard him with the ideas he talks about in his essay on me.
[Guest]: And I still have things, I mean, I just, even when I'm working on one book, the second and
[Guest]: third somewhere playing around, because there's so much, I'm curious about many different
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: I know what I don't write about, you know.
[Guest]: I never write about economics, because I don't understand it.
[Guest]: I never write about technology, because I don't understand it.
[Guest]: I never write about fiction, and I never write about films.
[Guest]: But that leaves still a very large and capacious, you know, array of subjects with which to
[Guest]: engage, you know, in what I read about, what I discuss, what I write about my columns,
[Guest]: and what I think about in my book.
[Guest]: So I think, and I think it's in that sense, although I consider myself a scholar, I have
[Guest]: a PhD, each of my books is based on many years of original research, I'm glad I'm not in
[Guest]: the academy.
[Guest]: Because in the academy, you're compelled to read the latest article in the latest cutting
[Guest]: edge journal.
[Guest]: Here I'm free to roam as I wish, intellectually, you know, I can read whatever I want, you
[Guest]: know, in whatever way, you know, I'm now reading, for example, a wonderful biography of the
[Guest]: Jewish philosopher Martin Buber, who had a famous argument with Gandhi, who grew up in
[Guest]: Germany and had to go into exile because of what was happening in the 1930s, and was an
[Guest]: early proponent of a bi-national state in which Arabs and Jews would coexist, right.
[Guest]: Now, this is not something which if I was teaching, a full time professor, I would be
[Guest]: reading generally, you know, I'd be told to read one of the latest book on whatever the
[Guest]: Mughal relations with the Rajput, so whatever else is topical, or so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So I think, in that sense, not being in the academy frees you to do this, to range widely.
[Guest]: But Dukhan was lucky that he met me and I got to know him.
[Guest]: I was also deeply fortunate in having him as my editor, helping him shape the prose
[Guest]: of, you know, my first books.
[Guest]: Yeah, but I always have many ideas.
[Guest]: And sometimes I return to them 15 or 20 years later, as I did with Rebel Against the Nazis.
[Amit Varma]: Though I did lovely and illuminating, but I did ask you to sort of paint a picture of
[Amit Varma]: your mind and the sense that I mean that in is, what are you thinking about through the
[Amit Varma]: day?
[Amit Varma]: Like if someone was to map your brain, let's say that the gents who, you know, put a chip
[Amit Varma]: on the 2000 rupee note, they managed to put a chip in your brain, and they get a mapping
[Amit Varma]: of what's going on in there.
[Amit Varma]: Like, does your mind wander a lot?
[Amit Varma]: Like with me, my mind is just skipping around all the time, choppy, choppy, choppy.
[Guest]: When I'm writing, it doesn't wander, it's absolutely focused.
[Amit Varma]: It wanders when I listen to music, or when I'm working.
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier, you said something that also ties in with our discussion on rhythm, where
[Amit Varma]: you said that listening to music has made your prose clearer.
[Amit Varma]: Probably.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I totally buy that.
[Amit Varma]: I can see why that might be the case.
[Amit Varma]: Because one, all good music is precise, everything is in its place.
[Amit Varma]: It cannot be any other way, right?
[Amit Varma]: That's just how it is.
[Amit Varma]: And also listening to Hindustani classical, a lot of it, it seems to me, will slow down
[Amit Varma]: the rhythms in your mind, will put you in a quieter place where you can reflect more.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the words will come out with better consideration and all of that.
[Guest]: So do you think that there is...
[Guest]: You know, I listen to music lying down in the dark, roughly from 6 to 7.15, sometimes
[Guest]: 5.45 to 6.45.
[Guest]: And you know, Sujata, my wife, often comes back home from work and I'm asleep in the
[Guest]: dark and she...
[Guest]: Not asleep, listening to music, and she puts it out.
[Guest]: So I think that's clearly something which allows you to slow down, to reflect, walking
[Guest]: in Common Park too.
[Guest]: But I often now, the older I get, I mean, often just lie down and do nothing.
[Guest]: Today, for example, we met for lunch, and you wanted to do the interview straight away.
[Guest]: I said, I'll come in an hour.
[Guest]: I just went home and lay down, I didn't sleep.
[Guest]: I just said, you know, chalo, let's think about different things and that's what happens.
[Guest]: So I think, I suppose it's also a function of age that you, you know, when you're younger,
[Guest]: you can do things, you know, intense and focused and concentrated periods of work can extend
[Guest]: over six hours later.
[Guest]: But when I work, I'm only thinking of that piece of writing or that piece of research.
[Guest]: So I'll be in the archive, ordering a file, taking notes.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: My mind will not be wandering.
[Guest]: I'll be curious and excited and occasionally enchanted by what I found in that file I've
[Guest]: ordered in the archive, and I'll be assimilating it and taking it.
[Guest]: And I think some of that comes, again, these are things you can't, you know, use maybe
[Guest]: a post facto justification.
[Guest]: Some of this comes from long hours of cricket practice, you know, three hours in the nets,
[Guest]: trying to get an off break past the defense of Arun Lal, which happened about once every
[Guest]: six months.
[Guest]: So I think that some of this training in sport or music maybe gives you an appetite for that
[Guest]: kind of sustainment.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, for people listening to this who haven't heard my episodes with Ram before, the one
[Amit Varma]: we did just before this, which I linked from the show notes, was extensively about his
[Amit Varma]: cricketing life.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I love that episode.
[Amit Varma]: I want to double click now on lying in the dark listening to music because I've done
[Amit Varma]: that also.
[Amit Varma]: But I find that my state of mind can be in three different places when I do that.
[Amit Varma]: One is where I'm lying in the dark and listening to music.
[Amit Varma]: And in the beginning, it's nice and soothing.
[Amit Varma]: But then my mind is wandering and is going all over the place.
[Amit Varma]: It's just jumping around.
[Amit Varma]: The other is when I'm actually focused on the music.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not background.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just enjoying it, right.
[Amit Varma]: And the third is something that I find it hard to achieve.
[Amit Varma]: Is that meditative state where you are just still you don't really need to think of anything
[Amit Varma]: that the mind is always working, but you can be still in the moment completely relaxed.
[Amit Varma]: Like as I say these, you know, I close my eyes and just relax my muscles, that kind
[Amit Varma]: of state where you are in that kind of flow.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, which of these is more common with you?
[Guest]: What music do you listen to?
[Amit Varma]: I listen to all kinds of music, but it's eclectic.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't lie down and listen to rock, for example, I listen to quieter music if I'm
[Amit Varma]: in that state of mind.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, I when I was younger, I would listen to a fair amount of folk and some rock.
[Guest]: But now I've become just as I, I just listen to classical music, Hindustani classical music,
[Guest]: you know, all that's what I listen to.
[Guest]: And maybe that's more conducive to that kind of quiet and listening, because also the tempos
[Guest]: built up slowly and then you follow it and you kind of take your clues from it.
[Guest]: It's hard to explain, you know, I don't think what it does to you.
[Guest]: But it's given a very different and happy dimension to my life, you know, and I must
[Guest]: say I am an enthusiastic amateur listener with the emphasis on amateur.
[Guest]: So I my late friend Keshav Desi Raju, who's already figured in this conversation, was
[Guest]: a remarkable civil servant, legendary secretary of the Ministry of Health, who transformed
[Guest]: our attitude toward disabled people, towards mental health.
[Guest]: And then in retirement wrote a landmark biography of M.S. Subbalakshmi before he tragically
[Guest]: died last September at age 65.
[Guest]: Keshav was someone I would call when I listened to a piece of music I'd not heard before,
[Guest]: and he would instruct me gently, lovingly, in the most non-patronizing way possible.
[Guest]: You know, I wish I had that ability, which real connoisseurs don't.
[Guest]: My wife, Sujata, often chastises me for being impatient when people who don't know much
[Guest]: about cricket ask me questions about cricket.
[Guest]: And she's right.
[Guest]: You say, isko kya pata, iske baat, iske saath mein kya baat karunga, Sachin and Dravid ke
[Guest]: baat.
[Guest]: And Keshav was truly learned, but he would never be non-patronizing.
[Guest]: So I was grateful having people like him, and others I discussed.
[Guest]: I mean, he's now gone, so I can't really, you know, ask him about questions.
[Guest]: I like asking other people.
[Guest]: I would like to ask, you know.
[Guest]: And so I think it's, I'm not at all a scholar of music in the way, say, Amit Chaudhry is,
[Guest]: for example.
[Guest]: I just like listening to it.
[Guest]: I have a rudimentary appreciation of it.
[Guest]: I think I know the difference between great and very good, and very good and good.
[Guest]: I think that much, you know, maybe 15 or 20 rags I can recognize, seven or eight are particular
[Guest]: favorites of mine.
[Guest]: YouTube has an extraordinary repository, which you can just mine and mine and mine.
[Guest]: But I don't really think about my books when I'm listening to music.
[Guest]: When I'm working, yes.
[Guest]: Then I'm thinking about the next chapter and what the arguments might be like.
[Guest]: But when I'm listening to music, I'm just listening.
[Guest]: And I'm not disturbed at all.
[Guest]: My mind is not wandering.
[Guest]: I'm just soaking in the beauty of music.
[Amit Varma]: So the last episode I released was with Amitabh Kumar, the writer.
[Amit Varma]: And he told me about how when he dies, the music he once played at his funeral is Henrik
[Amit Varma]: Gorecki's Third Symphony, right?
[Amit Varma]: So I was very intrigued by that.
[Amit Varma]: And after we recorded the episode, I turned off the lights and outside my window, there's
[Amit Varma]: a night sky and I'm looking into the night sky and I'm playing that.
[Amit Varma]: And I was deeply, deeply moved by it, right?
[Amit Varma]: And it's a very powerful piece of music.
[Amit Varma]: And later, I shared this with another friend who has a home in the mountains.
[Amit Varma]: And he told me that, look, in the 90s, I would listen to it a lot.
[Amit Varma]: But then my wife said, please don't listen to this because it is so eerie and lonesome
[Amit Varma]: in the mountains that this kind of amplifies that.
[Amit Varma]: And by listening to this, and in fact, by reading Amitabh's book, which is full of journal
[Amit Varma]: entries.
[Amit Varma]: But just by listening to this, I felt I got an insight, not an intellectual insight, but
[Amit Varma]: maybe an empathetic insight into this person who is my friend, right?
[Amit Varma]: By listening to something that moved him and by being moved by it.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to ask you, in terms of classical music, what are your sort of favorite works
[Guest]: which really move you, compose you as pieces?
[Guest]: I can't answer that.
[Guest]: I think I can answer that in a broad sense.
[Guest]: You know, as I said, I know enough now to know the difference between great and very
[Guest]: good.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, great, great in my mind, in vocal music, it would be Malik Arjun, some reasonably well-known
[Guest]: names.
[Guest]: So Malik Arjun, Bhimsen, Kumar Gandhar, Kishori Amogar.
[Guest]: Alongside some names not so well-known, but to my mind also great, Basavaraj Rajguru,
[Guest]: Sharafat Hussain Khan.
[Guest]: Some who are great and there are not many recordings of them, D. V. Palushkar and Fayyaz
[Guest]: Khan would count in them.
[Guest]: Among instrumentalists, there would be Ali Akbar, Ravi Shankar, Nikhil Banerjee, Bismillah
[Guest]: Khan and Vilayat Khan, five truly great.
[Guest]: Just below would be Buddhadev Dasgupta, Vilayat Khan, Arvind Parikh.
[Guest]: And so there were 15 or 20 musicians I can listen to all the time, different compositions
[Guest]: by them.
[Guest]: I would occasionally go to younger people.
[Guest]: So, you know, I think I would listen, I like Ashwini Bhedra Deshpande, I like Veena Sahasrabudhe,
[Guest]: I would like Rashid Khan, you know, I like Venkatesh Kumar, he's a very fine young vocalist
[Guest]: in Bangalore called Priya Prashutaman, whose music I like very much.
[Guest]: So I would, so but I, you know, I think there's a difference between, maybe there's a difference
[Guest]: between Western classical music and Hindustani music in that regard, that they are Western
[Guest]: classical music, there are particular symphonies, particular compositions that people regard
[Guest]: as their favorites.
[Guest]: You know, Hindustani music is more, you know, it's more a kind of a different kinds of things.
[Guest]: So I can't say that.
[Guest]: It's just that it's endless.
[Guest]: And as I said, I think I know the difference between Kumar Gandharv and a guy from Kolhapur
[Guest]: who's imitating Kumar Gandharv.
[Guest]: Okay, for example, right.
[Guest]: So we're also very listenable, you know, because his imitation is quite good, you know, it's
[Guest]: like, you know, a great pianist versus a competent pianist playing Beethoven.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's at the joys of YouTube is you're exploring it all the time.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a wonderful, you know, what I go for example, there are two or three people
[Guest]: on YouTube, who and I'm discovering more, who upload high quality music all the time.
[Guest]: One is a chap called Raju Ashokan, who lives somewhere, I think in Atlanta, Georgia, and
[Guest]: who is loves Hindustani and Carnatic music.
[Guest]: The other is a Bengali called Subrata Choudhury, who probably lives in Kolkata.
[Guest]: And take every week or so they upload five or six recordings.
[Guest]: So when I go to YouTube, I'll just see what is there from Raju Ashokan and Subrata Choudhury
[Guest]: and just a whole ocean of joy unfolds.
[Guest]: You know, sometimes what I do is I listen to music when a great musician dies.
[Guest]: So when Buddhadev Dasgupta, who was a magnificent sarod player, who actually combined a career
[Guest]: as a top class professional engineer, general manager of the Calcutta Electric Supply Company
[Guest]: with playing music.
[Guest]: So he was never as well known as Amjad Ali Akbar, but in Delhi.
[Guest]: And since I did a PhD in Kolkata, I could go for concerts of Buddhadev Dasgupta.
[Guest]: And when he died, Subrata Choudhury had put up some 15-18 recordings.
[Guest]: So that sustained me for a month.
[Guest]: So you know, it's like, it's like that.
[Guest]: So it's, I would not say I have a, you know, even 10, you ask me to list 10 recordings,
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't be able to.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, from a selfish perspective, I'm just thinking that I want to go back after
[Amit Varma]: this to my hotel room and turn off the light and listen to something you recommended.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just going to sort of mention a piece of advice I give my writing students that
[Amit Varma]: avoid adjectives, and use verbs, verbs are powerful.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to take your mind away from the adjective great, which you use, and go to
[Amit Varma]: the verb love.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you love all of these people, which is why you think they're great, and
[Amit Varma]: you name them.
[Amit Varma]: But what the last time you the last time you lay in the dark and listen to music, I could
[Amit Varma]: recommend something to you.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Guest]: Now, there's a, there is a piece of music, which is one of my, among my 50-100 favorites.
[Guest]: It was a concert.
[Guest]: There are two, I'll give you two options, it depends on how much time you have.
[Guest]: If you have an hour, they're both concerts in Bangalore, okay.
[Guest]: So if you have an hour, listen to a Yaman, Kalyan, Jugalbandi, between Ali Akbar Khan,
[Guest]: whom you know of, and someone you may not have heard of, called Doriswami Iyengar, who
[Guest]: is a great Veena player of the 20th century from Mysore.
[Guest]: So a Hindustani-Carnatic Jugalbandi, Sarod Ali Akbar, Veena Doriswami Iyengar, played
[Guest]: in the home of a couple who are great connoisseurs of music, Shivram and Lalitha Ubaikar, who
[Guest]: are both now dead, who had a home, you know, not far from the palace grounds.
[Guest]: This is a one hour Yaman Kalyan.
[Guest]: I mean, it's just magical, it's like 1961 or 62, and it's full of two truly great musicians
[Guest]: playing the most beautiful raag in my city, in the home of a couple I knew, and who encouraged
[Guest]: me and loved me and, you know, inspired me, okay.
[Guest]: Now that's one piece of music, which is one hour long, if you have that time.
[Guest]: If you have only half an hour, okay, go to YouTube and do Bade Gulam Ali Khan, Hamsadhwani,
[Guest]: Bangalore 1956.
[Guest]: Now, this is again very, it's a fabulous piece of music, Bade Gulam very rarely sang Hamsadhwani,
[Guest]: he's known for many other raags, but not for Hamsadhwani, it's a very unique recording
[Guest]: of Hamsadhwani.
[Guest]: Hamsadhwani is a Carnatic raag incorporated in Hindustani music, and it was sung by Bade
[Guest]: Gulam shortly after he returned to India from Pakistan, you know, Bade Gulam was originally
[Guest]: from the Patiala Punjab gharana, so he went to Pakistan.
[Guest]: And then he found there is no place for music there, he came back, or not enough place,
[Guest]: he came back, and Moraji Desai, an austere puritanical guy who's got a bad rap from historians,
[Guest]: but always for right reasons, got him a government house in Bombay so that he could stay there.
[Guest]: He was made an Indian citizen.
[Guest]: And shortly after that, he came to Bangalore, where in the Ram Navavi concert, which is
[Guest]: held every spring in Basarangudi, the heart of old Bangalore, in the in the compound close
[Guest]: to Tipu's palace, summer palace, in the compound of the Fort High School, which is a gorgeous
[Guest]: colonial building, he sang under open awning, he sang Hamsadhwani.
[Guest]: And it's a fabulous recording, and I think of it, 1956 Ram Navavi, my late friends, Lalita
[Guest]: and Shivram Ubaikar would have been there.
[Guest]: My other friend, the great philanthropist and connoisseur of music Tara Chandravalkar,
[Guest]: the architect, may have been there.
[Guest]: Some of my uncles and aunts may have been there in 1956, the year Karnataka was created
[Guest]: as a state of Mysore.
[Guest]: These two pieces of music are sublime in themselves.
[Guest]: One Bade Gulam Singhi Hamsadhwani in the city part of Bangalore.
[Guest]: One Doriswamy Iyengar and Ali Akbar playing Yaman Kalyan in the controlment side of Bangalore.
[Guest]: Just listen to Iyengar.
[Amit Varma]: If you have half an hour, one hour, after you will just go to heaven.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Another question.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a question coming from my own genuine curiosity.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, not a question that I feel should be asked or my listeners might want to know,
[Amit Varma]: I want to know in the sense that, you know, when I was growing up, my mother was a Hindustani
[Amit Varma]: classical musician, though an amateur, of course, but she learned it for many years.
[Amit Varma]: She would sing and then at one point, she started a choir and she would conduct that
[Amit Varma]: I'll post a video from that on in the show notes, why not.
[Amit Varma]: But I never got into it, partly because I was like a rebellious kid and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like rock sunenge, Nirvana sunenge, yeh sunenge.
[Amit Varma]: And I have in recent years become attracted to Hindustani classical and just classical
[Amit Varma]: music in general.
[Amit Varma]: But I am struggling with how to educate myself on it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, where does one you know, without going to a guru, reach that level where you
[Amit Varma]: can understand, you can begin to understand, one the technical stuff like ragas and all,
[Amit Varma]: and two to sort of understand context where all this is coming from, like what you did
[Amit Varma]: so beautifully is not just spoke about Hansadbhani and he didn't perform it often, but also gave
[Amit Varma]: that context of a place in time, which gives a work an added meaning for me, right and
[Amit Varma]: for everyone who was there, no doubt.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, do you know, I mean, how did you go about it?
[Guest]: It's just 50 years of interest, 40 or 45 years of interest, talking to people who know much
[Guest]: more than me.
[Guest]: So I was lucky that in university, I fell in with a group of friends who taught me about
[Guest]: music.
[Guest]: And I had Keshav Desi Raju.
[Guest]: Then when it comes to non-Hindustani music, my son Keshav has listened to a lot, in fact,
[Guest]: unlike me, he has a musical ear and can sing.
[Guest]: So when I want a change from Hindustani music, I go to him.
[Guest]: So African music, you know, and things like that, you know, suggestions come from there.
[Guest]: So just knowing that there are people who can alert you to dimensions of music that
[Guest]: you don't know about.
[Guest]: And actually, my knowledge, it's my enthusiasm.
[Guest]: And my love far exceeds my knowledge of music, you know, but what it's given me is incalculable.
[Guest]: And the older I get, it gives me more and more and more is how I would put it.
[Guest]: So I think it requires long hours and years.
[Guest]: The first concert, first piece of Hindustani music I remember was in about 1972 or 73.
[Guest]: I was an asthmatic and I had an attack at night and I took a drug that kept me awake.
[Guest]: I put on the radio, All India Radio and Bismillah Khan was playing Durga, which is still one
[Guest]: of my favorite compositions.
[Guest]: And that stuck to me.
[Guest]: Two years later, I went to university and fell in with a group of friends.
[Guest]: So it's all it is actually 50 years, you know, if I probably 71 or 72, I listen to Bismillah.
[Guest]: So it's 50 years of listening to music, you know, and I'll never be learned or scholarly
[Guest]: or have really a deep insight into what goes into great music.
[Guest]: But yeah, I mean, it's just making the time for it.
[Amit Varma]: I think the best learning can often be by osmosis.
[Amit Varma]: So if you just if you're enthusiastic, that's the first step.
[Amit Varma]: And other things just happen.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, a quick aside before I go to my next kind of question, what you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: about the connection between, say, your ability to focus while working or researching or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: and the connection between that and your time in the nets playing cricket is again very
[Amit Varma]: resonant to me, because I feel that any kind of Riyaz is Riyaz for the mind, not just for
[Amit Varma]: a particular field, like I will often to my writing students also when I'm trying to tell
[Amit Varma]: them how to, you know, inculcate a particular writing habit of the craft, you need to first
[Amit Varma]: be mindful and then you internalize it.
[Amit Varma]: So Sunil Gavaskar goes out in the nets as a seven year old, he's not playing a perfect
[Amit Varma]: straight drive, but he's being mindful of where his feet are, where his elbow is going,
[Amit Varma]: and then it becomes second nature and he can do it in a split second.
[Amit Varma]: And so that's also resonant that if you do Riyaz in any one field, it will shape your
[Guest]: mind.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I will just add to that.
[Guest]: I was lucky in that I spent so many years playing a team sport and not an individual
[Guest]: sport.
[Guest]: If I was, you know, wanted to be a tennis champion and I was playing eight hours, just
[Guest]: alone with someone else against the wall, with a marker against the machine, you're
[Guest]: different.
[Guest]: You know, I think being part of a team sport teaches you many things, glorying in somebody
[Guest]: else's time, even if you fail, traveling in a group, you know, going, taking a bus or
[Guest]: a second class train journey somewhere else without a smartphone.
[Guest]: Now the 11 cricketers in the team will all be on their smartphones.
[Guest]: So I think being part of a team sport and, but Riyaz, yes, Riyaz, yes.
[Guest]: Riyaz is crucial, you know, practice, discipline, vigor, hard work.
[Guest]: But I think learning to take the rough with the smooth comes from being in a team sport.
[Guest]: Of course, in tennis also you lose, but your egos hurt much more than, because it is after
[Guest]: all an individual sport.
[Amit Varma]: Beautifully put.
[Amit Varma]: So I was having this discussion with some of my writing students on one of the WhatsApp
[Amit Varma]: groups with them.
[Amit Varma]: And we were talking about the influence of parents.
[Amit Varma]: And on the one hand, it's indisputable that parents have a huge influence on us.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, it's been argued convincingly by various people and by various studies that
[Amit Varma]: that's actually not the case.
[Amit Varma]: Like Judith Rich Harris wrote this great book called The Nurture Assumption, which came
[Amit Varma]: out in the 90s, a seminal book in my view, which kind of showed that your key influences
[Amit Varma]: in childhood are really your peers.
[Amit Varma]: The parents don't really matter so much.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there might be, you know, even though these are contradictory, I think there
[Amit Varma]: might be grains of truth to both of these.
[Amit Varma]: Now in your case, I have, you know, reading through your writings and all that, picked
[Amit Varma]: up snippets of things where you refer to your parents in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: Like you speak about how, when you were a kid, your father's staff car would never take
[Amit Varma]: you anywhere or pick you up and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And he was so meticulous about that.
[Amit Varma]: You've spoken about, you know, how in 1962, Nehru came, you know, spoke in your town,
[Amit Varma]: and your mother was so moved and so inspired, and this was after the loss of the war to
[Amit Varma]: China, that she donated a bangles to the cause and everybody was scandalized and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I would imagine that that is something that kind of shapes a person as well.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your parents, about the kind of influence, the kind of childhood
[Amit Varma]: that you had growing up, and how your relationships with them evolved.
[Guest]: So I think this is not merely in retrospect, the way they shaped me was one that there
[Guest]: was absolutely no caste or community.
[Guest]: So I am technically a Brahmin, but I've never worn a thread.
[Guest]: My father never wore a thread.
[Guest]: I used to think it's because he's a scientist.
[Guest]: But now I realize that it's partly because he's a scientist, partly because his father's
[Guest]: elder brother was a pioneering social reformer in Karnataka, still revered here in this state
[Guest]: called R. Gopal Swami Iyer, who was the first Brahmin to campaign for the era in the modern
[Guest]: world to campaign for the eradication of untouchability in the state, was my father's father's brother.
[Guest]: So there was no caste feeling, there was no community feeling.
[Guest]: You know, remarkably, if you can imagine, of course, we were upper caste, middle class.
[Guest]: So we had a cook.
[Guest]: So most Tamil Brahmin families would only have a Brahmin cook.
[Guest]: We had a Rajput cook, followed by a Muslim cook.
[Guest]: Of course, no, not cook, meat.
[Guest]: My mother taught in a school, her closest friends were two Christians and a Muslim.
[Guest]: And so that says no community or caste feeling.
[Guest]: It was partly also because of the way we were in a public sector outfit.
[Guest]: And that's how Nehru's India, I mean, there were some bad sides about the public sector
[Guest]: in terms of economic productivity and innovation, but in terms of pluralism and social solidarity
[Guest]: and showcasing the diversity of India, that was part of their strength.
[Guest]: So that was part of what they gave me.
[Guest]: The other thing that particularly my father gave me was he was an extraordinary Indian
[Guest]: parent in that he spent so much time with his children.
[Guest]: You know, he would play cricket with me, he would take me birdwatching.
[Guest]: My sister was a very gifted athlete, all because of him and her training.
[Guest]: And he never, he just let me do what I wanted.
[Guest]: I got a second class in my BA.
[Guest]: I could have got a, because I was from Doon School in St. Stephen's, I got a job in Hindustan
[Guest]: Lever.
[Guest]: He said, you want to do an MA?
[Guest]: Do an MA.
[Guest]: I got another second class in MA.
[Guest]: All those entitlement routes were available to me or a comfortable job because of my privilege
[Guest]: and my English speaking abilities.
[Guest]: I said, Appa, I want to do a PhD.
[Guest]: He said, okay, go and do a PhD.
[Guest]: So there was absolutely no pressure of any kind, particularly from him.
[Guest]: So I think in that sense, I think nurture did play an important part in what I may have
[Guest]: turned out to be.
[Guest]: But peers, yes.
[Guest]: And I think peers, of course, I mean, intense debates, arguments.
[Guest]: I've already spoken about music, my friendships in college, debates and arguments with them
[Guest]: in Calcutta.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: I mean, I have some regrets.
[Guest]: I mean, I think I have, I have some regrets about the range of what I could have learned.
[Guest]: And the main regret I have is that almost all my conversations, intellectual conversations
[Guest]: over the last 40 years have been conducted in English.
[Guest]: There have been some in Hindi, but not enough, and not at all in a third language.
[Guest]: So if there's any advice I'd give a younger scholar or writer of any kind listening in.
[Guest]: I mean, unlike, say, for example, Amitabh Kumar, whom you was your last guest.
[Guest]: I suspect that now he's lived in America for many years.
[Guest]: Between the ages of 10 and 30, it will be 50-50, or maybe even 60-40 in favor of Hindi
[Guest]: is what I suspect, you know, in the case of Amitabh, right.
[Guest]: And I think that's probably an abiding regret I have that, you know, that my world was shaped
[Guest]: really by conversations and arguments and debates in English, which may have made me
[Guest]: a better writer as a consequence, but probably shut certain windows into how to approach
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll take a digression here and ask you a question that I had saved for later, but
[Amit Varma]: you've touched upon it now.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is, are we all Annie Besant?
[Amit Varma]: Now, the context for this is that as you write in Rebels Against Siraj, the context of this
[Amit Varma]: is that English could have been a hindrance for her because she couldn't, you know, once
[Amit Varma]: other leaders who had connects with the masses like Gandhi and all came up, her English wasn't
[Amit Varma]: enough.
[Amit Varma]: There was a mass party, and she was kind of relegated to the sidelines, and in her case,
[Amit Varma]: it was a bug.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one thing that I have explored, and you know, people sometimes ask me that, in what
[Amit Varma]: way have I changed through the years of doing this podcast?
[Amit Varma]: And one way certainly is in realizing that I was in a sort of a bubble all my life, that
[Amit Varma]: I was in an English speaking bubble.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I only saw, you know, one aspect of the country and had sort of a vision of
[Amit Varma]: the country, which I think was largely wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And we discuss this at lunch also about how, you know, we are the fringes, we English speaking
[Amit Varma]: liberal elites are, and the country is something else.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I've brought this up in a context where I have mentioned you, in fact, where you know,
[Amit Varma]: and the first time this, so there's a thread of conversations I've had.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember I spoke with Aakar Patel, who I'll be recording with again soon, but I,
[Amit Varma]: my first episode with him was about three years back.
[Amit Varma]: And Aakar and I were both in agreement over something that you had said in this essay
[Amit Varma]: in Caravan, that the Hindu right wing does not have any intellectuals worth the name,
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: And we were both in agreement with that.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense where I articulated it then was that look, you know, there's so called conservatism
[Amit Varma]: and the ideas that might come are just a fig leaf for bigotry and misogyny and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's partly true.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I was convinced by other guests in later episodes, like Akshay Mukul, like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Suyash Rai, Rahul Verma, and a host of people was that, that impression, which
[Amit Varma]: you, Aakar, me, we all shared is wrong, because we are reading only in English, we're not
[Amit Varma]: reading the languages.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, various people gave various examples, like, you know, Suyash spoke about
[Amit Varma]: Karpatri Maharaj.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is not whether one agrees or disagrees.
[Amit Varma]: I disagree strongly with whatever I've understood of Karpatri Maharaj, who's not really been
[Amit Varma]: translated even into English that much, but it's coherent.
[Amit Varma]: And it's coherent.
[Amit Varma]: And it's, you know, it's just coming from a different place.
[Amit Varma]: But from that tradition, it's coherent.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, I feel in this conversation, I've come full circle.
[Amit Varma]: Because when Aakar and I mentioned that we referred to, you know, your excellent essay.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, it's just something that it hasn't been a similar process, where, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you speak of today of just only English being a loss, being a liability.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that way even more and not just in this context of not understanding these
[Amit Varma]: social currents.
[Amit Varma]: But even in a context of like, I did an episode with Sarah Rai, a fine writer in her own right,
[Amit Varma]: also the granddaughter of Munshi Premchand.
[Amit Varma]: And when we got to the section where I asked her about the books which had influenced her,
[Amit Varma]: all the English language books she named I had read, but none of the others, the Hindi
[Amit Varma]: books I had even heard of in some cases.
[Amit Varma]: And I felt horrible that here I have an opportunity to be in such a rich country in terms of culture
[Amit Varma]: and languages.
[Amit Varma]: And I've kind of missed out on all of that.
[Guest]: So what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: You know, it's a large and complicated question and one can't, you know, do any kind of justice.
[Guest]: By the way, Kalpati Maharaj figures in India.
[Guest]: Okay, so and they were certainly at the time and in the essay you talk about, I mentioned
[Guest]: conservative intellectuals like Guriye and Jadunath Sarkar and others.
[Guest]: So I think, although I have operated mostly in English, almost exclusively in English,
[Guest]: I've had the good fortune to have had interactions through my work with many people writing in
[Guest]: different Indian languages and also close friendships.
[Guest]: So great Uttarakhandi historian Shekhar Pathak, whose magisterial history in Hindi of the
[Guest]: Chipko Andolan I edited and helped publish, has been a lifelong friend with whom I write
[Guest]: conversations all my life.
[Guest]: D.R. Nagraj, the much mourned Kannada writer, whom also his conversations have shaped me.
[Guest]: The remarkable couple, Bengali and English writers Meenakshi and Sujith Mukherjee, Tridib
[Guest]: Surod, the scholar of Gandhi and who writes in Gujarati and in English, Gopal Krishna
[Guest]: Gandhi, who actually is fluent in five languages, Girish Karnad, Mahashweta Devi, whom I also
[Guest]: have the privilege of knowing.
[Guest]: So I've always made it my business to listen and learn from people who don't write in Hindi.
[Guest]: So it's not as if the world in which I express myself is English.
[Guest]: But the world in which I observe things come at least at second hand mediated by people
[Guest]: who have this extraordinary depth and understanding from the languages.
[Guest]: Now, I think one should not self-flagellate too much.
[Guest]: You know, Karpatri Maharaj may have been formidably learned, but he was a bigot.
[Guest]: He was a bigot because he did not embrace the world outside.
[Guest]: We may not be not embracing the world inside.
[Guest]: And this is what, you know, I've written an essay, I don't know if you've seen it.
[Guest]: I wrote an essay some years ago called The Rise and Fall of the Bilingual Intellectuals,
[Guest]: which I think is probably the best essay I've ever written, which identifies this phenomenon
[Guest]: that from about 1880 to 1960, they were truly bilingual intellectuals.
[Guest]: So there was, you know, Ambedkar writing in Marathi and English, Tilak writing in Marathi
[Guest]: and English, Nirmal Kumar Bose writing in Bengali and English, etc. etc.
[Guest]: Ganesh Karnad, who understood the world of Western literature, but wrote in Kannada.
[Guest]: And now, there's been a separation of discourses into an English only and the vernacular language
[Guest]: only.
[Guest]: I think the cross-fertilization that used to take place has been lost.
[Guest]: And I think our greatest strength was that.
[Guest]: It was not that it was not the case that, you know, the vernacular intellectuals necessarily
[Guest]: knew the world better.
[Guest]: They may have known the village better.
[Guest]: They have known the Adagao better.
[Guest]: But they would not have known how Adagao fit into the district, into the province, into
[Guest]: the country, into the world.
[Guest]: Now, I think that is what we are missing.
[Guest]: What India had uniquely, uniquely in the history of the modern world, India had a flourishing
[Guest]: bilingual discourse.
[Guest]: There was a reason why Tagore did his creative work in Bangla and wrote his polemical essays
[Guest]: in English.
[Guest]: There's a reason why Gandhi wrote some things in Gujarati and some things in English.
[Guest]: So we had a flourishing bilingual world.
[Guest]: Yeravati Karve, whom I think you mentioned a little while ago, wrote wonderfully in both
[Guest]: Marathi and in English.
[Guest]: Now, that is the world we have, which is unique to us.
[Guest]: The French only operated in French.
[Guest]: The Spanish only operated in Spanish.
[Guest]: The Japanese only operated in Japanese.
[Guest]: We actually had a bilingual intellectual world, which produced the finest social science,
[Guest]: history, political analysis, philosophy, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And that is what we have lost.
[Guest]: That is what we need partly also to regain.
[Guest]: And how that will happen, I can't say.
[Guest]: But certainly, every language is a window into a new world.
[Guest]: And I would encourage the brilliant Hindi and Marathi writers who are in their 20s to
[Guest]: improve their English.
[Guest]: I would encourage the brilliant English writers in their 20s and 30s to become really conversant
[Guest]: with a second or a third language other than English.
[Guest]: So one should not excessively self-flagellate on this business.
[Guest]: A writer only speaking Kannada, reading Kannada, writing in Kannada, arguing Kannada is also
[Guest]: limited in her own way.
[Guest]: So I think that should be very clear.
[Guest]: And I think we had uniquely this bilingual tradition.
[Guest]: I mean, this essay is called The Rise and Fall of the Bilingual Intellectual.
[Guest]: It was first published in EPW, and there were about half a dozen very interesting responses
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: Then I revised it, and then it came, I think, in one of my collections, I think, Patriots
[Guest]: and Partisans, which explains this, that the richness of the bilingual intellectual, and
[Guest]: bilingualism and what it gave us, and what we are losing by the separation of discourses
[Guest]: into English only and Bhasha languages.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to double click on this, but before that, an observation where you said, Karpatri
[Amit Varma]: was a bigot.
[Amit Varma]: He was not just a bigot.
[Amit Varma]: He was a deep misogynist.
[Amit Varma]: And one example of this is he has this book called Marx or Ram Rajya or something of that
[Amit Varma]: sort, which has not been translated into English, but I'll leave a link to the Hindi whatever
[Amit Varma]: for anyone who may want to go through it, where he talks about why communism is bad.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason that he says is that, you know, because there is no concept of property, you
[Amit Varma]: know, every woman will be like a bucket from which anybody may drink, you know, which is
[Guest]: revelatory of how...
[Guest]: That's how he figures in India after Gandhi, actually, misogyny rather than his bigotry,
[Guest]: or both, because he was opposed to the Hindu code bill, because it gave women rights.
[Guest]: And because Ambedkar, who was a Dalit, wrote it.
[Guest]: I mean, he may have been a brilliant bigot, that's fine.
[Amit Varma]: But he was a bigot nonetheless.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And let's double click on the bilingualism question, where, you know, on one hand, like
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out, you said language is a window to other cultures.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one reason why it's useful.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm wondering if there's another reason that it is useful, which lies in the fact
[Amit Varma]: that languages are different from each other in fundamental ways.
[Amit Varma]: And a kind of expression, which is possible in one language, may not be as heightened
[Amit Varma]: in another.
[Amit Varma]: Like, like you talk about Tagore doing his fiction in Bangla and leaving his polemic
[Amit Varma]: for English.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that one reason for that might be that Bangla, and I'm half Bengali,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, it's a beautiful language, is by its nature expressionistic, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's that sense of beauty is heightened.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it is natural for fiction and poetry to be in Bangla.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas, you know, English is much more functional, and economical and crisp, and it would be
[Amit Varma]: a good vehicle for polemic, which is not to say that you cannot do polemic in Bangla,
[Amit Varma]: you cannot do beautiful things in English, because say, that's why I love English, but
[Amit Varma]: different languages have different characteristics.
[Amit Varma]: So is that part of it?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you, when you spoke about Tagore, you spoke about Gandhi, and so on?
[Amit Varma]: Is that part of it?
[Guest]: It would be there, of course, absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know enough about different languages, but I think you captured it well.
[Guest]: There are certain registers available in Hindustani that would not be available in English for
[Guest]: someone who knows both languages, and so on.
[Guest]: So absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a reason why people, you know, who are absolutely familiar, you know, again,
[Guest]: this is my big friend, Keshav Desi Raju, was fluent in, that is, formidably fluent in English,
[Guest]: Hindi, Telugu, and Tamil.
[Guest]: Gopal Krishna Gandhi, who was a close friend of Keshav and mine, is formidably fluent in
[Guest]: English, Hindi, Tamil, and Gujarati.
[Guest]: So they had three languages in common, and the three of us spent a lot of time together
[Guest]: on different parts of the world, in different cities in India, and their jokes and allusions
[Guest]: would flow effortlessly in the three languages they shared.
[Guest]: I would, I could capture 100% of the English, 75% of the Hindi, but none of the Tamil, right?
[Guest]: And the way they would talk, you know, what linguists call code-switching, depending on
[Guest]: what is...
[Guest]: So I think you'll see this.
[Guest]: I mean, if you see, if you were to ever, I don't know whether he's ever come on your
[Guest]: program, but please get him, Arvind Krishna Marutra.
[Amit Varma]: Has he ever come?
[Amit Varma]: I'd love to have him on.
[Amit Varma]: I love his poetry.
[Amit Varma]: I've never asked him.
[Guest]: You know, with some people, I...
[Guest]: If you see how Arvind switches between Hindi, English, and Hindustani, seamlessly and beautifully.
[Guest]: He's a friend of Sehra Rai.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe Sehra should second my recommendation and tell him to come.
[Guest]: She, in fact, already has.
[Guest]: So she offered to introduce me to him someday.
[Guest]: Please, please, please.
[Guest]: So please, you tell him, you speak both Hindi and English, and you just see how beautiful
[Guest]: it is to listen to him, right?
[Guest]: So I think that is...
[Guest]: So absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, they're different registers, different forms of expression.
[Guest]: So I can appreciate Hindustani, modern Hindi, to the extent that I can see, I can love it.
[Guest]: You know, when I hear Arvind speak, or when I used to hear Ramu Gandhi lecture in Hindustani,
[Guest]: it was just fabulous, you know, or reading JP's prose.
[Guest]: I mean, JP spoke the kind of Hindustani that was spoken in Dehradun, it was not the kind
[Guest]: of Sanskritized Hindi that it has now become.
[Guest]: And there's a lovely essay of JP, which I, but a few things I've translated from Hindi,
[Guest]: is an essay of JP called Nagaland mein shanti ka prayas, the quest for peace in Nagaland,
[Guest]: which I translated chunks of, and it's so beautiful to read.
[Amit Varma]: I had Ninal Pandey on my show recently, and she was also just switching effortlessly between
[Amit Varma]: Hindi and English, and it was beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: And on the one hand, you know, the only other time, the only time I've done a full Hindi
[Amit Varma]: episode on my show was with the former leader Gunwant Patil, who could only speak in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: So in my introduction, I apologize to those listeners who may not be familiar with Hindi,
[Amit Varma]: because people expect an English podcast.
[Amit Varma]: But in this case, my whole sense was that I just want my guests to be authentic to who
[Amit Varma]: they are.
[Amit Varma]: So whatever comes naturally, you kind of go with that.
[Amit Varma]: And then Amitavs Kumar, he told me about this evocative Hindi poem that speaks to him.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a poem called Rail by Alok Dhanwa.
[Amit Varma]: And it goes this way.
[Amit Varma]: Har bhale aadmi ki ek rail hoti hai, jo maa ke ghar ke oor jati hai, seeti bajati hui,
[Amit Varma]: dhooa udati hui.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: To me, this is untranslatable, because just the rhythm of seeti bajati hui, dhooa udati
[Guest]: hui, you can't capture this feeling.
[Guest]: I find the sentiment problematic.
[Guest]: It's glorification of the maa, I find highly problematic, highly problematic.
[Amit Varma]: Spoken like an academic intellectual, actually, at one level.
[Guest]: Mere paas maa hai, peri gari unke paas jati hai, I find that lovely, it's beautiful to
[Amit Varma]: listen to.
[Amit Varma]: It's an emotional expression.
[Unknown]: It's like, I think there is an empathetic world and there is an intellectual world.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question is sort of, you know, earlier, you said that so much of life is
[Amit Varma]: accident when we were speaking about the passage of time and what shapes the world and you
[Amit Varma]: said in your own life, it's been like that.
[Amit Varma]: And in this lovely essay about you by Nandini Sundar and Srinath Raghavan in a functioning
[Amit Varma]: anarchy, which is another lovely book, they wrote, indeed, the succession of jobs that
[Amit Varma]: Guha did not join is revealing, he turned down an offer from the Times of India, a professorship
[Amit Varma]: at the Department of Sociology, Delhi School of Economics, because he had decided by then
[Amit Varma]: to move to Bengaluru, a professorship at the National Law School of India University in
[Amit Varma]: Bengaluru, because it would have meant attending from 9am to 5pm, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: That's a highly incomplete list, because that only deals with jobs in India.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And jobs elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: Jobs elsewhere also.
[Amit Varma]: And it reminded me of something that my dad said, like, you know, a year before he passed,
[Amit Varma]: I sat down with him and just recorded conversations about his life to get to know him better.
[Amit Varma]: And he told me about how, you know, at the time, like I said, he was, you know, in grew
[Amit Varma]: up in Calcutta.
[Amit Varma]: And in the 60s, he had a roaring love affair with my mother, who he went on to marry.
[Amit Varma]: And the condition for marriage from the other side was that you have to have a job and only
[Amit Varma]: the IAS is respectable.
[Amit Varma]: So with like three months left, he prepared and he got into the IAS.
[Amit Varma]: But at that time, among the alternative paths he had available to him was first National
[Amit Varma]: Citibank had offered him a job, Clarion Advertising had offered him a job and all big names at
[Amit Varma]: that time.
[Amit Varma]: He had an offer from Cambridge where he could have gone to Cambridge and, you know, done
[Amit Varma]: his PhD and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the then editor of the EPW had told him that he had loved something he had written
[Amit Varma]: and had said, you come to Delhi and work for me and I will groom you to be my successor.
[Amit Varma]: And he actually went and worked for two, three months at the EPW and then he missed my mother
[Amit Varma]: to too much and he went back and joined the IAS.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm always fascinated by the counterfactuals in none of which I would exist, of course,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm always fascinated by the counterfactuals in the different directions that a person
[Amit Varma]: could grow in, because in my mind, he would have been a completely different person in
[Amit Varma]: any of these options.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, what you feel about the options in your life?
[Amit Varma]: Would you have actually been a different person in any of these options?
[Amit Varma]: And if there is, if there is a core Ram Guha, core you, which is common to all of these,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how would you define that core that no matter where you went and what you did,
[Guest]: that core would be there?
[Guest]: Very hard to say how life would turn out.
[Guest]: I mean, among the reasons I could turn down all those jobs is because my wife Sujata had
[Guest]: a design company and who supported me, partly financially and wholly morally and personally,
[Guest]: you know, for more than 40 years now.
[Guest]: So it's very hard to answer that kind of question.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't believe in counterfactual history, really.
[Guest]: I once joked, I have written, I think, two columns on counterfactual history.
[Guest]: One was what if Subhash Bose had come back alive in 1947, arguing that he would have
[Guest]: been a major challenger to Nehru and he would have split the Congress party and stood against
[Guest]: Nehru in 52 and might even have won.
[Guest]: And the other was what if Lal Bahadur Shastri had lived another five years?
[Guest]: And that ended with the line that if you lived another five years, Rajiv Gandhi would still
[Guest]: be alive, would be a retired pensioner from Indian Airlines, indulging his hobby in photography
[Guest]: and Rahul Gandhi would be a mid-level manager in a private sector company.
[Guest]: But beyond that, I don't, with me, I don't indulge in counterfactual history.
[Guest]: I can certainly say, I thank the kind of people who, the chain of lucky accidents that rescued
[Guest]: me from pre-K to scholarship, which was learning about Elvin in a Koraput village from a veterinary
[Guest]: doctor called Dr. Das, when I was doing my MA.
[Guest]: And then I come back to Delhi and find his writings, meeting Sujata, which happened in
[Guest]: 1979, then going to Calcutta for a PhD and this mentor of mine, Anjan Ghosh.
[Guest]: And of course, Rukmini Dhawani, my first editor, who transformed my life by publishing my first
[Guest]: book and then my subsequent books.
[Guest]: So I think these accidental meetings certainly played out, but what would have happened?
[Guest]: Very hard to say.
[Guest]: I mean, I can't, I mean, if I'd taken a professorship at the Delhi school back in the early 90s,
[Guest]: I may have nurtured some good PhD students, on the other hand, I'd been fed up with academic
[Guest]: politics and intrigue.
[Amit Varma]: So to go to the second part of that question, that if, where I asked that, what is like,
[Amit Varma]: at your core, is there an essential Ram Gohar that you look at?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one argument could be that we are all construction of our genes and circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe the deeper you go into trying to figure out what the real self is, you realize
[Amit Varma]: there is no real self.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, like when I, for example, look back on myself as a young person, I've
[Amit Varma]: changed in so many profound ways.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a core there, which is perhaps the same with the same weaknesses and flaws,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps, but it's kind of the same.
[Amit Varma]: So when you look back on the 15 year old Ram Gohar, for example, what do you and that person
[Amit Varma]: kind of, who is that, you know, what is that core?
[Guest]: So I think it's this sense of opposition to, I'll let you put it differently, you know,
[Guest]: I was in a, I'll answer this question slightly differently, but you've got a sense.
[Guest]: I was, you know, before the pandemic, I was in a, chairing a panel.
[Guest]: And the other speakers in a panel were a Dalit, a gay, and someone from a minority, and one
[Guest]: of them was also a woman, right?
[Guest]: And I said there, that I was born with five forms of privilege.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Just reflecting on my, who was around me, I was born with five forms of privilege.
[Guest]: I was Hindu, I was in India, five were Hindu, male, Brahmin, straight, and English speaking.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Hindu, male, Brahmin, straight, and English speaking.
[Guest]: Now I was taught very early on by my parents to disregard the Hindu and the Brahmin part.
[Guest]: So that part from 9-15 to 63, I detested religious chauvinism and I detested feelings of caste
[Guest]: superiority.
[Guest]: That has been consistent since then.
[Guest]: Even then I was ambivalent about my English being a privilege.
[Guest]: You know, I could see that because when I went to boarding school, there was a classmate
[Guest]: of mine in the dorm who was always mocked for being a Hindi speaker, and that really
[Guest]: upset me.
[Guest]: So I could see that.
[Guest]: So maybe I was guilty about English privilege even then.
[Guest]: I could see that English gives you an unfair advantage in life in this country.
[Guest]: Even I was, I suppose for my times, relatively more open on sexual preferences.
[Guest]: Since we are, you know, talking in a personal vein, and I haven't really talked about these
[Guest]: things before, and this I think would interest some of your listeners.
[Guest]: My father's closest friend, who was my godfather, was a man you might have heard of called K.T.
[Amit Varma]: Acharya, a great food historian.
[Amit Varma]: You know about him?
[Guest]: I've heard the name, but I haven't read him.
[Guest]: So he is India's greatest food historian.
[Guest]: He wrote these two landmark books, a companion to Indian food and a historical gossip to
[Guest]: Indian food and food materials.
[Guest]: And, you know, if you read All Our Food, you become doctors quoting him all the time.
[Guest]: He was my father's closest friend from college days, and he was gay, and my father knew it.
[Guest]: And to his great credit, was fine with it.
[Guest]: We're talking about the early 60s and 70s, one of the few people, Dr. Acharya, the world
[Guest]: renowned protein food scientist who then became the pioneering historian of Indian food could
[Guest]: confide in, was my father, right?
[Guest]: So I knew that Tambu Mama was gay, and it's okay.
[Guest]: Some people are gay, right?
[Guest]: Now, later on, of course, marrying Sujata, who's a designer, and of course, the design
[Guest]: community, there are many gays.
[Guest]: So I'd say I have a lot in common with that young man.
[Guest]: The form of privilege that I found hardest to combat, and has been most difficult, is
[Guest]: male privilege.
[Guest]: You know, I was brought up thinking boys are superior to girls.
[Guest]: I was sent to a boarding school, my sister was not, even though she was smarter and a
[Guest]: better sports person than me, right?
[Guest]: So I stayed for a very long time, till I had a daughter of mine, Ira, who grew up and is
[Guest]: a passionate feminist, and probably has moderated my patriarchy, but not overcome it.
[Guest]: So I'd say that is, so for good and for bad, in many ways, in my values, I think what my
[Guest]: parents gave me, this absolute lack of caste and community feeling.
[Guest]: I think that's something, and that's why I hate it when discriminations are made on these
[Guest]: grounds and particularly by our own dispensation, but that sense that, and I think university
[Guest]: reinforced it.
[Guest]: The wonderful thing about Delhi University was that it was an all-India university.
[Guest]: Unlike Bombay and Calcutta, which were far superior back in the 40s and 50s, but increasingly
[Guest]: became provincialized.
[Guest]: I mean, the catchment area of Bombay was Bombay, the catchment area of Kolkata, Kolkata became
[Guest]: really a Bengali university, Bengali city and a Bengali university.
[Guest]: Who would know, anyone who studied in Kolkata in the 60s or 70s or 80s or 90s today, who
[Guest]: would know that was the place where Raman was a professor doing his Nobel Prize winning
[Guest]: work or Radhakrishnan wrote his major works of philosophy.
[Guest]: So Delhi University that way was a wonderful showcase for the diversity.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and then get back to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons and now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Ram Guha about his rich life.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you'd mentioned earlier in the show about how you were sort of an accidental
[Amit Varma]: historian.
[Amit Varma]: And in our last episode, of course, we discussed your cricketing journey in a manner of speaking.
[Amit Varma]: And you pointed out that Rukun Advani, your editor was kind of surprised that you, you
[Amit Varma]: know, he had known you in college and you were just a sports guy.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, he wouldn't talk to someone like you.
[Amit Varma]: But then he had to take you seriously because you're changed so much.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about that change.
[Amit Varma]: What are the triggers for that change?
[Amit Varma]: What what what led to it?
[Guest]: So I did a BA, got a second class, Delhi School of Economics for MA via St. Stephen's College
[Guest]: to play cricket.
[Guest]: And in my MA, after my MA previous, there was a remarkable teacher, the Delhi School
[Guest]: of Economics, who happened to be my cousin, incidentally, Dharmakumar, who I've written
[Guest]: about elsewhere.
[Guest]: And she initiated a scheme, get the economic students to do field research, because they
[Guest]: only looked at numbers and ran regressions and never actually did research projects.
[Guest]: You know, they learned fancy statistical techniques.
[Guest]: And there was a series of grants they made and to do research in the summer holidays.
[Guest]: Now, it so happened that my father's younger brother worked with Hindustan Aeronautics
[Guest]: in Bangalore and was in charge of a MIG factory in Koraput in Orissa, a factory making Soviet
[Guest]: fighter planes that had been built in the depths of Adivasi Orissa, maybe because it
[Guest]: was so far away from the Chinese border or God knows why.
[Guest]: And my uncle said, look, it's called Adivasi workers and we don't know how they're doing.
[Guest]: So I designed a research project to study Adivasi workers, the transition from tribal
[Guest]: life to industrial factory life.
[Guest]: And it was an economics project, it was looking at productivity records, running regressions.
[Guest]: And the PRO of that factory was a very nice and kindly man called Mr. Patro.
[Guest]: And at some stage, he asked me, do you want to see Adivasi village?
[Guest]: So my last Sunday, we went to, in Koraput, we went to a Gadaba village.
[Guest]: In that village was a veterinary scientist called Dr. Das, who took one look at me and
[Guest]: said, where have you come from?
[Guest]: I said, I've come from Delhi.
[Guest]: He said, long ago, a tall young man like you came from far away to these hills and wrote
[Guest]: about the Adivasis.
[Guest]: His name was Verrier Elwin.
[Guest]: Have you heard of him?
[Guest]: I said, no, I have not heard of him.
[Guest]: I went back to St. Stephen's College and I was clearly recognizing my career as a cricketer,
[Guest]: I was going nowhere.
[Guest]: I dropped out of the cricket team, went to the library, found Verrier Elwin, fell in
[Guest]: love with his prose, which is evocations of Adivasi life.
[Guest]: I said, this is about real people and their real struggles.
[Guest]: It's not equations and numbers and graphs and charts, which anyway, I don't understand.
[Guest]: I'm a lousy economist, but maybe I'll make a fist of becoming a sociologist after reading
[Guest]: Elwin.
[Guest]: So I finished my MA and my father gave me another year off.
[Guest]: I came to Bangalore.
[Guest]: I fell in love with Suzatha and I started looking for options.
[Guest]: So I applied for the Times of India, I got in, I applied to the state bank, I got in.
[Guest]: I applied to IRMA in Anand, the first batch of rural management I got in.
[Guest]: And because of Elwin, I was interested in possibly pursuing a PhD in sociology.
[Guest]: And I knew that my own university, Delhi, would never give me admission because my grades
[Guest]: were so bad.
[Guest]: And a person you surely know of, Shiv Vishwanathan, whom I knew from my days in Delhi University,
[Guest]: told me, Calcutta has a small sociology department and there's a brilliant young scholar called
[Guest]: Anjan Ghosh there, just apply.
[Guest]: So I applied, got in, and the choice was going to Anand and becoming an activist and a proselytizer
[Guest]: for cooperatives, which is what I really wanted to do because of what Kurien had done and
[Guest]: what Shyam Benegal had shown through his movie Manthan.
[Guest]: Suzatha told me flatly, if you go to Anand, I can't marry you because designers can't
[Guest]: get jobs in villages.
[Guest]: If you become an academic and get a job in the city, I can marry you.
[Guest]: And that made my decision.
[Guest]: And so I went to do a PhD in Kolkata.
[Guest]: And within a week, sociology resonated with me.
[Guest]: I could see that I related to society and politics and human beings in a way I did not
[Guest]: to indifference curves and stochastic models.
[Guest]: And so I was just discovered Mamathia completely by accident.
[Guest]: And then I got into environmental research, I met Rukun and so on.
[Guest]: So it was really this series of accidents that made me a scholar from sociology.
[Guest]: I moved to history and then later to biography.
[Guest]: But there is still something of the sociologist in me.
[Guest]: I think, you know, the kind of books I've written, say India after Gandhi, is not the
[Guest]: work of a conventional historian, you know, because it does so much about caste and language
[Guest]: and religion that comes from my training in sociology.
[Guest]: So I think I was grateful for that.
[Guest]: And Anjan Ghosh was a wonderful mentor.
[Guest]: He did many, many other things for me.
[Guest]: You know, he taught me, he was a Marxist, but his politics never entered the classroom.
[Guest]: In the classroom, he taught me Weber and Durkheim with as much scrupulous care as he taught
[Guest]: me Marx.
[Guest]: Outside the classroom, yes, you know, he would be going for dharnas and waving red flags.
[Guest]: He also introduced me to film and hardly watched film when I was in college.
[Guest]: And he made me a member of a Kolkata film club.
[Guest]: So we watched Truffaut and Goddard and Kurosawa.
[Guest]: So he was a quite remarkable man, and I think really, Sujata, Anjan and Rukun are probably
[Guest]: the three people I owe the most to professionally.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me something more about each of these people in turn.
[Guest]: I won't speak about Sujata because she...
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Guest]: But tell me about the other two.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So Anjan did a BA in English in Jadavpur University, was like many young people at that time caught
[Guest]: up in the Naxalite movement, attended the inaugural party meeting at which Kanu Sanyal
[Guest]: spoke in the Maidan in, I think, May 1970, saw himself as a non-party Marxist, then went
[Guest]: to JNU to do an MA in Sociology.
[Guest]: JNU at that stage was dominated by the SFI, the student wing of the Communist Party of
[Guest]: India Marxist.
[Guest]: Arvind, Anjan opposed them as being to the left of the SFI.
[Guest]: He was associated with a group called Free Thinkers, which opposed SFI every year in
[Guest]: the student's election and lost every year.
[Guest]: But he was really admired in JNU for his love of the scriptures.
[Guest]: He was called Lenin because he had a goatee and he was bald like Lenin.
[Guest]: You know Lenin.
[Guest]: He stayed out in Delhi, he was teaching in IIT and he would have made a career in Delhi,
[Guest]: which is really the home of Indian sociology.
[Guest]: But his father died and he had to return to Calcutta to look after his mother.
[Guest]: And he was just a wonderful man with a delightful sense of humor, a love of scholarship, a truly
[Guest]: gifted teacher.
[Guest]: I wish he had been in a university, not in a management institute.
[Guest]: So that is Anjan and I particularly respected him for his lack of dogmatism, that whatever
[Guest]: his political beliefs in the classroom, they left aside.
[Guest]: And later on, I read a great essay by Max Weber on universities, where Weber says this.
[Guest]: He says, a university is not a political party or a seminary.
[Guest]: The job of a teacher is to expose students to all kinds of thought and let them make
[Guest]: up their mind.
[Guest]: And that is what Anjan practiced, too few teachers practice that.
[Guest]: You know, when I was younger, historians were told that Marxism is the only way to understand
[Guest]: history.
[Guest]: Now we're all told you have to become nationalist historians, whatever that phrase means.
[Guest]: So Anjan, I think the curiosity and love of scholarship and intellectual independence,
[Guest]: I think comes from Anjan.
[Guest]: Rukun, whom I met later and who published my first book and with whom I'm still in close
[Guest]: touch, is a very different kind of animal.
[Guest]: He's a wonderful editor.
[Guest]: He understands, understood thought and he understands language.
[Guest]: You know, he has a PhD in literary history from Cambridge.
[Guest]: His first book was on the nonfiction writings of E. M. Foster.
[Guest]: Over the years, he's become an absolute recluse.
[Guest]: You know, he's hardly meets people.
[Guest]: He's in Ranikhet with his wife, the novelist Anuradha Roy, run a boutique publishing house,
[Guest]: which he founded after leaving OUP, after 20 years of building OUP's list.
[Guest]: Our conversations are essentially by email.
[Guest]: And during the pandemic, one of the things I did was to go over all our correspondence,
[Guest]: dating from handwritten letters from 1985, from 1985 to 2000, we wrote to each other
[Guest]: by hand and I had all his letters and copies of some of mine, because I had some, I would
[Guest]: type, he would write by hand, lovely flowing hand and onion skin paper, 2000 on email.
[Guest]: And I just, I just kind of, how do I put it, accepted the more interesting parts of the
[Guest]: correspondence.
[Guest]: And there's a file of 180,000 words, which is only the excerpts from our correspondence
[Guest]: of which 130,000 must be Rukun's and certainly the most incisive and the funniest and the
[Guest]: wickedest parts are from Rukun.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a devastating sense of humor, the kinds of things in those mails about some
[Guest]: of our Stefanian contemporaries who are now very, very famous and powerful people.
[Guest]: You know, one day I hope someone, I've done this because I, I will leave this behind for
[Guest]: posterity.
[Guest]: Rukun's letters to me about all kinds of things.
[Guest]: I mean, I wish I could read out some excerpts to you, but I think it's premature.
[Guest]: So yeah.
[Guest]: So I think Sujata, Anjan and Rukun are really the three people to whom I would have watched.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say that the nature of the letters changed when they shifted to email?
[Amit Varma]: Because like one of the things I discussed with Amitabh also in my recent episode with
[Amit Varma]: him is how back in the day when we would write by hand, there would be, you know, we'd put
[Amit Varma]: more of ourselves into it.
[Amit Varma]: It was a rarer thing to actually sit down and write.
[Amit Varma]: While today, everything is functional and transaction.
[Amit Varma]: How are you doing?
[Amit Varma]: Are you better now?
[Amit Varma]: Let's meet at eight.
[Amit Varma]: And that's pretty much all you're writing.
[Amit Varma]: But when you would sit down back in the day, you'd elaborate at length, you'd share memories.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, Rukun shared impressions of these people.
[Guest]: But not for Rukun.
[Guest]: Rukun doesn't talk anyway.
[Guest]: So he doesn't, you know, he doesn't phone, he doesn't, he's not on his smartphone, he
[Amit Varma]: listens to a lot of music.
[Amit Varma]: And for you?
[Amit Varma]: Like the letters you write, have they changed?
[Guest]: But I write to him, I often write at greater length.
[Guest]: His letters are longer and more reflective and more sharper.
[Guest]: But I do occasionally write him long letters.
[Guest]: For example, I wrote him a long letter after reading Amartya Sen's memoir.
[Guest]: And I won't disclose the contents of what I wrote, but I could really share it with
[Guest]: Rukun.
[Guest]: What I felt about that memoir, which is about five, five paragraphs, and then eight paragraphs
[Guest]: came back from him and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: I think probably the quality and the sharpness of my correspondence has changed and deteriorated,
[Guest]: but not his.
[Guest]: So when I put a chubby him, then the kind of things that come out, you know, I just
[Amit Varma]: utterly, utterly, utterly, utterly delightful.
[Amit Varma]: The other question I have is, it's very interesting that when you talk about your falling in love
[Amit Varma]: with sociology, actually going there, talking to real people, leaving the numbers behind.
[Amit Varma]: Now, there's a sort of a dichotomy there.
[Amit Varma]: And there are two parallel attractions.
[Amit Varma]: And one attraction that especially young people have is for the big picture, the big story,
[Amit Varma]: the theory that explains everything and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And the other attraction that more and more as I grow older, I find, I find it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's becoming bigger and bigger for me, is that just get down to the level of the individual
[Amit Varma]: life.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, you of course, at some level, it's anecdote, and it's, you know, big data is
[Amit Varma]: much bigger, but there is some richness there as well.
[Amit Varma]: So how would you approach this?
[Amit Varma]: Because as a historian, you have, you know, you've tackled those big narratives, and you've
[Amit Varma]: looked at the big, vast sweep of history.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you've done the sociology and actually going and spending time with
[Amit Varma]: the tribals and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, tell me.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I absolutely, I mean, it's making large, complex arguments about how societies
[Guest]: change and how individuals actually live, whether in the minutiae of their daily lives,
[Guest]: whether that's explored and documented in detail through field research or through archival
[Guest]: research.
[Guest]: I've shifted from one to the other, I mean, my books on Gandhi and rebels against the
[Guest]: Raj are really about individual lives.
[Guest]: But I think one day I'll go back to a broader sociological book, I'd like to write a book
[Guest]: on, you know, on some eight or nine defining themes in Indian history.
[Guest]: And yeah, I mean, I think between sociology, history and biography, I mean, they kind of
[Guest]: I've gone back and forth and in my columns to I mean, sometimes they just evocations
[Guest]: of a person who recently died.
[Guest]: Sometimes there's a larger argument about, you know, about society or politics or culture
[Guest]: or the state.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's kind of I, but still, it's within within certain clearly defined boundaries.
[Guest]: You know, I, I do I read fiction, I never write about it, and I never blub a novel.
[Guest]: I, you know, do I follow what's happening to the extent I understand it in the economy,
[Guest]: I would never presume to comment on what is often asked, sir, we are getting people to
[Guest]: comment on the budget, what is our views?
[Guest]: No, I'm not.
[Guest]: No, no, sir.
[Guest]: We want non economists.
[Guest]: Sorry.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about learning to write and to be yourself.
[Amit Varma]: As a storyteller, you know, because, you know, we were joking at lunch earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, a short while back, you mentioned, you said to me when you mentioned it earlier,
[Amit Varma]: in case frantic listeners are rewinding this episode to figure out where I did that it
[Amit Varma]: was not in this episode, it was during a lunch together.
[Amit Varma]: And we you know, one of the quips I made during lunch is that there should be a Ram Guha pro
[Amit Varma]: generator for all historians.
[Amit Varma]: So the you know, they don't write turgid prose, and they actually write lively prose, which
[Amit Varma]: tells a story and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how you found your writing voice, like, were there any early
[Amit Varma]: models?
[Guest]: Yeah, so there was an early model, a very early model, who was the English cricket writer
[Guest]: A.A.
[Guest]: Thompson, who wrote these evocations of county cricket and Yorkshire cricket in particular.
[Guest]: And many years later, I read an essay by a British novelist, who said, when you're young,
[Guest]: your model should be a minor writer.
[Guest]: When you're 14 or 15, don't think you can write like Tolstoy, or if you're a budding
[Guest]: historian, you can't write like Mark Block, or Max Weber.
[Guest]: So I suppose to some extent, there are all kinds of different people.
[Guest]: I mean, it's hard to see a particular model.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you
[Amit Varma]: But if you had to look back, ignoring models and just talking of craft, if you had to look
[Amit Varma]: back at your first book, in terms of craft, you know, what are the refinements?
[Guest]: So there was much more jargon in my first book.
[Guest]: You know, I think people said it's well written for a sociologist, but the qualification was
[Guest]: for a sociologist.
[Guest]: Okay, so that's how I see it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I suppose, once I stopped trying to impress my academic peers and my academic seniors,
[Guest]: and really trying to convey the depth and richness of the story as I felt it had to
[Guest]: be conveyed, where I was disregarding, you know, what people would make of it.
[Guest]: I suppose that happens, you know, and it's again, Riyaz is so important, you know, writing
[Guest]: for several hours each day, I think writing a column, I obviously, I had to write a column
[Guest]: because I did not have a job, I had to make a living by writing two columns, now I write
[Guest]: one.
[Guest]: My other friends have university salaries and pensions.
[Guest]: But if they were to write, university professors would write more often for the newspapers,
[Guest]: I think it will liberate them intellectually and in a literary sense.
[Guest]: So I think writing for a wider audience, knowing that your work is going to be translated into
[Guest]: all these Indian languages, and you can't be, you know, nodding to Foucault and Bourdieu
[Guest]: and Derrida and using all kinds of sort of complicated jargon.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me also about fiction, like you said that earlier, through most of your life, you
[Amit Varma]: didn't read much fiction.
[Amit Varma]: And you just mentioned in the break that during the pandemic, you rediscovered your love for
[Amit Varma]: fiction.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about you know, what was the fiction you read growing up, if any,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and was it a habit that kind of gradually went away?
[Amit Varma]: And what happened during the pandemic that you kind of fell in love with fiction?
[Guest]: So I think when I was growing up, I read some detective stories.
[Guest]: But when I was in college, I had long summer holidays.
[Guest]: So in term time, we'd be playing cricket, and St. Stephen's had the best college team
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: I mean, two of my contemporaries, we've talked about this before, Kirti Azad and Arun Lal
[Guest]: played cricket for the country.
[Guest]: So it was a very quasi-professional standard.
[Guest]: So from, and the season ran from July to March.
[Guest]: So there was no room after six hours of practice or a match to come and read a novel.
[Guest]: So in the summer holidays in Dehradun, I read novels.
[Guest]: And I remember two writers who made a great influence on me, novelists, and I can't really
[Guest]: now remember who recommended them to me, were Hemingway and Somerset Maugham, whom I read
[Guest]: everything they ever wrote.
[Guest]: And they wrote a kind of, if you read either or both of them, a kind of a clear, unadorned,
[Guest]: unornamented prose, you know, the kind of, the kind of prose a historian should be reading,
[Guest]: who wants to become a historian later on.
[Guest]: But then I stopped reading fiction for some time, and then I picked it up slowly, and
[Guest]: I was, I think my son, Keshava, who's a novelist and who reads very widely, has really alerted
[Guest]: me to the kind of things he thinks I'd like, and he's almost always right.
[Guest]: So now I read much more interior writing.
[Guest]: I don't really read the Hemingway, Maugham.
[Guest]: So Keshava introduced me to Penelope Fitzgerald, for example, Barbara Pym, you know, delicate,
[Guest]: intimate portraits of human relationships and their ambiguities and their complications.
[Guest]: So I was reading quite a lot of that, encouraged by Keshava.
[Guest]: Then the pandemic happened, and these vast open spaces of time opened up, because I was
[Guest]: not traveling anywhere.
[Guest]: And then I decided that I would read Tolstoy.
[Guest]: Now we've discussed in previous episodes, my books on Gandhi.
[Guest]: Now Gandhi really admired Tolstoy.
[Guest]: Gandhi had three mentors, and going back to a theme we've talked about, about, you know,
[Guest]: knowing your world inside, the inner world, but going, embracing the book globe.
[Guest]: Gandhi's three great mentors were Raichand Bhai, who was a Gujarati philosopher, Gokhale,
[Guest]: who was an Indian but not Gujarati social reformer, and Tolstoy, who was a Russian and
[Guest]: universal figure.
[Guest]: Okay, so, and I've written about what Gandhi got from Tolstoy.
[Guest]: But what Gandhi got from Tolstoy was his philosophical and moral and religious writings.
[Guest]: So there is, he read Tolstoy's essays on Brahmacharya, he read his, you know, book on religious philosophy,
[Guest]: The Kingdom of God is Within You, and that's where Gandhi's kind of anti-orthodox Hinduism
[Guest]: comes from.
[Guest]: Gandhi would not have wanted a Ram temple because Ram was inside his heart, as it was
[Guest]: inside, as Christ was inside Tolstoy's heart.
[Guest]: So, but there is no evidence that Gandhi read either Anna Karenina or War and Peace.
[Guest]: So I said, dekho, mujhko padhna hai.
[Guest]: And I started with a wonderful collection of Tolstoy short stories, which Keshavar lent
[Guest]: to me.
[Guest]: It's translated by this couple who do a lot of Tolstoy translations, they complicated
[Guest]: names, Pefner and Volkovsky or something, it's absolutely brilliant.
[Guest]: I mean, there's some famous short stories like Haji Murat and the Death of Iman Ilij.
[Guest]: But there's a story there, and these are about 50 page long short stories, there's a story
[Guest]: there called Sirji.
[Guest]: And it's a story of a Russian orthodox monk struggling with his sexuality.
[Guest]: I mean, I want, it's Tolstoy's, it's a story of Tolstoy who was not a monk.
[Guest]: It's also the story of Gandhi.
[Guest]: And I wonder if Gandhi at least read that short story, because here's a guy, he enters
[Guest]: a seminary, he's from a rich family, he enters a seminary, before he enters, he's due to
[Guest]: marry a gorgeous aristocratic beauty from a similar kind of noble family.
[Guest]: He says, no, I'm going to become a sadhu or a monk.
[Guest]: He enters a seminary, then is there doing all these austerities, and then falls in love
[Guest]: with a young woman, breaks his vow, is mortified and struck by remorse, abandons the seminary,
[Guest]: goes for a kind of a, becomes a mendicant, goes for a walk across Russia.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a fabulous, fabulous book.
[Guest]: And then I read Anna Karenina and War and Peace, and then I read Middlemarch.
[Guest]: So lots of time to be invested in these three epic novels, but they transform our understanding
[Guest]: of the world.
[Guest]: And I'm so glad that the pandemic allowed me to read these truly great novels.
[Guest]: I mean, now I've gone back to reading other stuff.
[Guest]: I was reading a more kind of a contemporary stuff.
[Guest]: There's a novel called Limonov, which is by the French writer, I think, Emmanuel Carrere,
[Guest]: which is about Russia in the last 20 or 30 years, very stark and direct and occasionally
[Guest]: brutal.
[Guest]: Then I read another book that Keshava recommended to me, which is called the Netanyahu's by
[Guest]: Joshua Cohen, which is an account of Netanyahu, Benjamin Netanyahu's father, who was a Zionist
[Guest]: historian and zealot.
[Guest]: And I must say two or three things.
[Guest]: One is out of choice.
[Guest]: I don't read fiction set in India because I'm reading about India all the time.
[Guest]: So since I don't have another language to explore the world, that language can give
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: When I read fiction, let me at least read it about Russia and Latin America and Africa.
[Guest]: At least I get a window into parts of the world that I would not otherwise get.
[Guest]: The second thing I'd say is that I have no illusions about where historians stand in,
[Guest]: you know, in, how do I put it, in any hierarchy of literary genres, you know, I think poets
[Guest]: are up there, the best poets are up there and then come novelists and several notches
[Guest]: below coming historians.
[Guest]: And I'm glad I've been able to, very late in life, spend time with people like Tolstoy
[Amit Varma]: and Georgiou.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, regarding the hierarchy, I would just say I get where you're coming from.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't think that much as I don't believe in all kinds of hierarchies, I think it depends
[Amit Varma]: on what you're optimizing for.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that hierarchy holds for interior life, that if you want to capture interior
[Amit Varma]: life, then yes, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I guess poetry is the purest exploration of that.
[Amit Varma]: And all of these novels you mentioned have that interiority.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm a big fan of Penelope Felcheryld, who you mentioned, especially Gate of Angels,
[Amit Varma]: which was such a moving book.
[Amit Varma]: And I mention her once in a while and think of her once in a while, because she started
[Amit Varma]: writing well into her 60s.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, for late bloomers, such as me, hopefully there is hope.
[Guest]: I also read her, by the way, she may have written more than one book of nonfiction,
[Guest]: but she wrote a biography of her father and her brothers, I think it's called the Knox
[Guest]: brothers.
[Guest]: I think they were writers and clergymen and quite remarkable family of four brothers.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me now then about the art of biography, because that is obviously something you are
[Amit Varma]: more than qualified to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: And at one level, like my writing students, we had a conversation recently about someone
[Amit Varma]: asked a question in one of the q&a of my webinars about the difference between fiction and nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: And my point was that fundamentally, you should think of it as the same.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, on the margins, there are differences.
[Amit Varma]: But fundamentally, you're telling a story, you're telling a story with a certain amount
[Amit Varma]: of craft, you want to make it evocative, you want to make it real, you want to make your
[Amit Varma]: characters 3d.
[Amit Varma]: It's all there.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a storytelling aspect to it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if I specifically want to drill down on biography, it is so full of specific challenges.
[Amit Varma]: One of the challenges is finding a suitable voice.
[Amit Varma]: Another challenge would be figuring out a way to go beyond bare surface biographical
[Amit Varma]: details and managing to capture the interior life of a historical figure without being
[Amit Varma]: presumptuous, without overreaching.
[Amit Varma]: So how has your thinking on that really evolved?
[Guest]: Tell me a bit first a little bit about the art of biography, again, talking about fortunate
[Guest]: meetings.
[Guest]: When I was working on my Elvin book, I spent a year in Berlin, at the Institute of Advanced
[Guest]: Studies there called the Wissenschaftskolleg.
[Guest]: And I was fortunate to have as one of my colleagues there, the great biographer of Goethe, a man
[Guest]: called Nicholas Boyle, who was professor of German at Cambridge University.
[Guest]: And this is the first biography I was writing.
[Guest]: So I had long conversations with Nicholas, which I think really taught me a great deal
[Guest]: about how to not abandon, but marginalize or sidetrack my sociological past and get
[Guest]: into the lives, the individual life of this, this character, his emotions, his relationships,
[Guest]: his feelings, his shifts of mood, his abrupt transitions and so on.
[Guest]: And from Nicholas, my conversation with Nicholas and then writing about Elvin, I wrote an essay,
[Guest]: which I published in the Financial Times many years later, where I coined what I called
[Guest]: the Boyle's laws of biography and as a kind of joke, because I'd got them from Nicholas.
[Guest]: And as I recall, four in all, you know, one is if your subject was a writer, always look
[Guest]: for sources that did not emanate from that subject.
[Guest]: You know, Gandhi, there are 97 volumes of Gandhi's collected works, but look for what
[Guest]: other people have written about Gandhi, look at unpublished correspondence around Gandhi,
[Guest]: about Gandhi, the collected works of Gandhi's letters, but not the letters of his correspondence.
[Guest]: So look into that.
[Guest]: That's the first Boyle's law of biography is always look for as many sources that do
[Guest]: not emanate from the subject himself or herself.
[Guest]: I mean, S. Gopal's biography of Nehru, which is a very good, important book, is massively
[Guest]: dependent on Nehru's writing.
[Guest]: Many books on Gandhi just don't go beyond the collected work.
[Guest]: That's the first lesson.
[Guest]: The second lesson is the literary quality, literary, emotional and indeed historical
[Guest]: quality of a biography is often determined by the secondary characters and how you flesh
[Guest]: out the relationships.
[Guest]: Now, this is not, biographers generally just follow that person's life.
[Guest]: They don't look at that person's friends, rivals, colleagues, interlocutors, children,
[Guest]: lovers and, you know, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So it has to be a vast cast of characters.
[Guest]: You know, my Gandhi biography, Sunny Mehta, whom I was privileged to have as my editor
[Guest]: on it, said there are 150 characters in it, who all seem to be interesting, you know,
[Guest]: obviously some more.
[Guest]: So I think the second, it is like an epic, your guy or your girl, you know, the central
[Guest]: character is only one among many and it's through your central character's relationships
[Guest]: with their, as I said, friends, rivals, enemies, lovers, children and so on, that you flesh
[Guest]: out the wider picture.
[Guest]: That's two.
[Guest]: A third law of biography is never anticipate.
[Guest]: You know, a sociologist would give a thesis and then explore the thesis.
[Guest]: Now, if you're writing about, for example, when you're writing about Elvin and he falls
[Guest]: in love with a tribal woman and eventually breaks up with that woman, don't let the reader
[Guest]: into that secret till the breakup actually happens.
[Guest]: A fourth lesson of biography, which I learned because both Elvin and Gandhi had left their
[Guest]: autobiography is, and this is my own coinage, an autobiography is a preemptive strike against
[Guest]: a future biographer.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: That person wants to leave her or his record behind and to preempt what the biographer
[Guest]: would do and don't be deterred even by someone like Gandhi, who may have apparently covered
[Guest]: his entire life and his childhood in such great detail.
[Guest]: I mean, one of the great delights of my Gandhi biography was to actually find his schoolmark
[Guest]: sheets, which are not there in the autobiography.
[Guest]: Then of course, finally, it would be the question of how to bring in the wider picture, the
[Guest]: larger landscape.
[Guest]: So in the case of Gandhi, of course, there's so many things.
[Guest]: There's the history of the freedom movement, there's the history of social reform, there's
[Guest]: the history of inter-religious relationship, there's the history of colonialism.
[Guest]: In the case of Elvin, it's more anthropological debates, the situation of the Adivasis.
[Guest]: So it's kind of a multi-layered approach.
[Guest]: And then of course, the subtlety of how you draw people in, when you introduce Nehru into
[Guest]: the story of Gandhi, or Elvin's tribal wife into his story.
[Guest]: I think that literally artifice plays a part, but where it is different from fiction writing
[Guest]: is that you can't invent.
[Guest]: It has been well said that a biographer is an artist under oath, that you cannot invent,
[Guest]: you cannot speculate, you cannot imagine.
[Guest]: You are constrained by what your sources tell you.
[Guest]: The last thing I'd say, and I'll stop there, is that my Gandhi biographies are actually
[Guest]: an exception.
[Guest]: In that they're about a very famous figure, much written about.
[Guest]: Most of my other books, including Rebels Against the Raj, are about kind of middle, interesting
[Guest]: middle range figures who touched many different worlds, who touched the world of the mighty
[Guest]: and the powerful, but also often live in villages with peasants and tribals and so on, and lead
[Guest]: interesting, unusual lives of what I call the middle range.
[Guest]: They're not totally destitute, nor are they really powerful and important.
[Guest]: Subaltern Studies is only about the oppressed.
[Guest]: Most biographies are only about Churchill, Napoleon, Gandhi, Ambedkar, etc.
[Guest]: These figures of the middle range, like Elvin, like the characters in Rebels Against the
[Guest]: Raj, like Palwankar Balu and the Dalit cricketer I wrote about, they are actually what I find
[Guest]: much more interesting.
[Guest]: So I'd like, if I was to write, I'm often told, why don't you write on Nehru, why don't
[Guest]: you write on Ambedkar?
[Guest]: I don't think I want to go down any of those routes.
[Guest]: The biographical subjects I might choose in the future will be actually forgotten, obscure
[Guest]: people who need to be rehabilitated.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about so many characters and so rich, I mean, if there are listeners
[Amit Varma]: who watch a lot of TV and web series and all of that, and are just getting into reading,
[Amit Varma]: I draw a comparison with The Wire.
[Amit Varma]: Like one reason The Wire, the TV show, the HBO show, kind of blew me away was it was
[Amit Varma]: very novelistic in the sense that it gave its characters space to breathe.
[Amit Varma]: So there weren't one or two main characters, you know, there were so many minor characters
[Amit Varma]: who had arcs of their own complex lives of their own.
[Amit Varma]: And that really kind of, you know, affected me.
[Amit Varma]: I want to come back to modern times.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, what we see today, one thing that I shouldn't say on the one hand, because
[Amit Varma]: we're not opposed to each other, two separate kind of things are playing out.
[Amit Varma]: One of them is that we are increasingly engrossed in narrative battles, which is all of politics,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Where narratives really matter.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, narratives have always mattered in politics, except that now, the technology
[Amit Varma]: to get these narratives to everyone are ubiquitous, we are surrounded by them.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the way history is used, has become deeply political, where you know, and
[Amit Varma]: the discourse is so polarized, that you're necessarily forced towards one simplistic
[Amit Varma]: narrative of the other, either Nehru was evil, or Nehru was good, and there was nothing wrong
[Amit Varma]: with him.
[Amit Varma]: And it's, you know, you don't see the shades of grey, you don't see the multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there is, it seems to me that a historian who wants to do actual history,
[Amit Varma]: and stay away from the politics into actual history and talk about this finds himself
[Amit Varma]: almost in a sense, as a crusader of a particular sort, where it is almost inevitable that she
[Amit Varma]: will be hated by all sides of the political debate, because what they're trying to say
[Amit Varma]: is that, hey, Nehru was good and bad, and you know, you got to look at all of this shit.
[Amit Varma]: The other aspect, and you know, I'll use the other wire, the excellent online site as an
[Amit Varma]: example here, is that what we have seen happen to our journalism, is that today, in our journalism,
[Amit Varma]: you either have people who are a disgrace to what journalism should be, or you have
[Amit Varma]: people and I'm thinking of people like the people of the wire, the News Minute, Scroll,
[Amit Varma]: News Laundry, so on, who are going above and beyond what you would expect journalists to
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, they are also being crusaders in this battle, like historians.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of this?
[Amit Varma]: Because I don't think that you would have wanted to play this game to stand up and fight,
[Amit Varma]: you would have wanted to sit in your study, listen to Malek Arjun Mansoor and do your
[Amit Varma]: thing.
[Amit Varma]: But now you're having to stand up and fight.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I fight, but I also don't fight all the time.
[Guest]: You know, I think it's important to have the time to space and to do your own work also
[Guest]: to pick your battles wisely, what are the things you want to fight about, you know,
[Guest]: and only fight about things, not just the things you care about, but things that you
[Guest]: know and understand.
[Guest]: So you'll recall that during the CAA protests, I was hauled up by the police, you know, I
[Guest]: was holding a placard in front of the town hall and I was taken away, right?
[Guest]: Now why did I do that?
[Guest]: Because I'm a biographer of Gandhi, because I grew up in an environment where religious
[Guest]: discrimination was regarded as wrong.
[Guest]: And as a biographer of Gandhi, I stand for Hindu Muslim harmony and against the subjugation
[Guest]: and suppression of a religious minority.
[Guest]: Now, both I feel about it, and I've worked on it.
[Guest]: Now that happened in some months later, the farm agitation broke up.
[Guest]: And there were endless calls, both in Karnataka and Delhi, sir, I'm not an economist, I don't
[Guest]: understand agriculture.
[Guest]: I said, okay, now, so it's very, very important, particularly for young scholars who are scholars
[Guest]: who see themselves also citizens with a conscience, to know what you can intervene in, where you
[Guest]: feel that you should not become an all purpose activist.
[Guest]: This is part of my problem with the phrase public intellectual, right?
[Guest]: Now, there's certain things I will speak on.
[Guest]: I will speak on freedom of expression, regardless of, you know, who is the victim, I will speak
[Guest]: on Hindu Muslim harmony.
[Guest]: I will speak about Adivasis, because I feel unlike Dalits and Muslims, their problems
[Guest]: are very rarely figured in the public discourse.
[Guest]: And I've worked many years on Adivasi questions, but I would not be, I mean, someone like me
[Guest]: would get, or every day, they'd be saying, yes, thank you, yes, very, very clear about
[Guest]: what, if you want to be a citizen, who takes your scholarship to the public square, in
[Guest]: a more active way than simply writing excessively, make sure that you understand the issue.
[Guest]: And you have some credibility in speaking about that issue.
[Guest]: So I think I worry sometimes about, you know, obviously, people are upset and angry and
[Guest]: maybe this kind of detachment I'm talking about comes with being an old man and maybe
[Guest]: not having energy and some would say cynicism.
[Guest]: But I think it's very, very important.
[Guest]: If you, I mean, I think crusader, I would not call myself a crusader, that I can have
[Guest]: a problem with that term.
[Guest]: But if you want to intervene in the public sphere, make sure that it's a subject on which
[Guest]: you care and which you have some reasonable understanding.
[Amit Varma]: My next question is also about social media, and I don't want to ask a general question
[Amit Varma]: about the social aspect of it or what it does to the discourse, I want to make it more personal.
[Amit Varma]: But first, you know, one of the things that, you know, what has happened definitely with
[Amit Varma]: social media is that it's polarised the discourse, you know, people go online, they form tribes,
[Amit Varma]: then you want to raise your status within your own tribe, how do you do that by attacking
[Amit Varma]: someone in the other tribe or by holding people in your own tribe to unreasonable purity tests?
[Amit Varma]: And eventually, you are not addressing any argument, you are always attacking people
[Amit Varma]: instead of addressing arguments, right?
[Amit Varma]: So all this we know.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, I read a recent and my understanding was that it brought out the worst in us, which
[Amit Varma]: even I have seen in myself sometimes when I have reacted intemperately to something
[Amit Varma]: that is happening.
[Amit Varma]: And I read an interesting study recently, which talks about how it's not that it brings
[Amit Varma]: out the worst in us, but it empowers the worst people who are most full of anger and all
[Amit Varma]: of these unpleasant things.
[Amit Varma]: And this gives them that megaphone, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not about that's not my question.
[Amit Varma]: My question is, at a personal level, and I've experienced this where people I'm acquainted
[Amit Varma]: with, or we have mutual friends with will behave in ways on social media, which they
[Amit Varma]: would never do in person, right?
[Amit Varma]: And and it's kind of hurtful, and you learn to ignore it after a while.
[Amit Varma]: And you learn to say, okay, it's a good thing that they have revealed themselves in this
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So what you see, and again, there is a line by Yeats from The Second Coming that you like
[Amit Varma]: to quote, where you say the best lack all conviction, while the worst are full of passionate
[Amit Varma]: intensity.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you see this amplified on social media.
[Guest]: It was actually when I quoted it, it was the people I had in mind were Manmohan on the
[Guest]: one side and Modi and Shah Rukh Khan on the other.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in this lovely interview, you gave to Madhu Trehan in 2012, which I'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: She's such a good interviewer.
[Amit Varma]: She does a really good job.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, she really brought and I love that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the personal aspect of it.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not asking for sociological wisdom.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it's evident to everyone what is happening to what it is doing.
[Amit Varma]: But at a personal level, did it disturb you?
[Amit Varma]: The constant attacks like you know, sometimes what will happen is that I'll open my Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll suddenly see that my notifications are flooded with abuse.
[Amit Varma]: And then I will know that fine, I know what happened.
[Unknown]: Either Barkha Dutt or Ram Guha retweeted me.
[Unknown]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: And now all their fans, quote unquote, have unleashed themselves in the mentions, which
[Guest]: is not to say don't retweet me, please do, but yeah, it's predictable by now.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you react to it?
[Amit Varma]: Does it make you sad sometimes?
[Amit Varma]: Does it like, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, I suppose, I spend less time on it nowadays, it just makes me more angry.
[Guest]: And I also recognize its limitations as a tool, my children have been very good in advising
[Guest]: me as to.
[Guest]: I'm on Facebook.
[Guest]: So I know all kinds of things I said about me on Facebook also, often by academics, not
[Guest]: by right wing trolls, by left wing academics, actually more than by right wing trolls.
[Guest]: I'm grateful for my children, for the kind of counsel they've given me over the years
[Guest]: and how to handle it.
[Guest]: And now I tweet actually less and less, and it's really my writing that, yeah, so it's,
[Guest]: but it is, I mean, I think what I like about Twitter is getting your ideas across and getting
[Guest]: other people's ideas across.
[Guest]: You know, so I often tweet like Mukul Keshavan is not on Twitter, he says interesting things,
[Guest]: you know, music postings by people I know, you know, so that at least you, it's a more
[Guest]: of a service that you're performing rather than getting into arguments and debates and,
[Guest]: you know, name calling and, and all that.
[Guest]: So yeah, so now I do, I actually tweet in my own voice less and less, I tweet my articles
[Guest]: but I tweet other people's articles or interesting shows, interesting discussions I might have
[Guest]: seen, occasionally a book recommendation, but very rarely.
[Amit Varma]: And what I kind of reassure you at this point is that one thing I realized about Twitter
[Amit Varma]: is that there is a vocal minority, which is really loud and acerbic, but there is a vast
[Amit Varma]: silent majority, which really appreciates the work people like you do.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, they might not express it often and perhaps, you know, if you're listening
[Amit Varma]: to this and you appreciate Ram's work, let him know, though he doesn't check his notifications.
[Guest]: I check my email, my email is in the public domain, please write to me.
[Amit Varma]: So there you go, please write to him and tell him how much his work means to you.
[Amit Varma]: I try and reply to every email I get, myself.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely, you're asking for trouble now, because there's just a thousand emails.
[Amit Varma]: I want to now stay with the Eats poem, the second coming, and talk about the lines that
[Amit Varma]: precede what I just quoted, where he wrote, the blood dim tide is loosed, and everywhere,
[Amit Varma]: the ceremony of innocence is drowned.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems to me to be so profound, because I find this happening in our society, right.
[Amit Varma]: And we were discussing over lunch, that, you know, we were sort of going back and forth,
[Amit Varma]: Yumi and Keshava, about, was our society always like this?
[Amit Varma]: Or has it become like this?
[Amit Varma]: And my sense is that this was a current running through our society from well before independence,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in Akshay Mukul's excellent book in the Gita Press, he talks about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: issues like love jihad and cow slaughter and all that were live in the 20s were live
[Amit Varma]: well before that, right?
[Amit Varma]: These are not new issues.
[Amit Varma]: So my sense is that this is what it was, and society has, in a sense, caught up with politics
[Amit Varma]: and the whole larger question of how, you know, the top down vision of the framers of
[Amit Varma]: our constitution, they failed, it was never going to work, you know, and Ambedkar knew
[Amit Varma]: it himself when he spoke about just a topsoil and democracy.
[Amit Varma]: What is your sense that, you know, what you see in society, like, I often say that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you, we talk of 2024 elections are so important.
[Amit Varma]: And my thing is that, yeah, even if the political dispensation changes, society is what it is.
[Guest]: You see, it's very, I mean, as a sociologist, I know that, again, I mean, here I am perroying
[Guest]: or plagiarizing with permission, I hope, a statement of Keshavar's, which I'll then explain,
[Guest]: which is that in India, things are never as bad or never as good as they seem.
[Guest]: You know, in 2005-6, when all my friends in Bangalore, the IT people were saying we've
[Guest]: become super power and we've decoupled India from Pakistan, now it's India and China and
[Guest]: we are the country of the year in Davos and, you know, all of that, that was, things weren't
[Guest]: that good.
[Guest]: And maybe now things aren't that bad.
[Guest]: And as a sociologist, I would say that there are many things going on in Indian society,
[Guest]: which actually at one level are deepening democracy.
[Guest]: So the challenge to the English speaking elite, the challenges to the caste system, the growing
[Guest]: organization assertiveness of Dalits, I think there are many, so many interesting things
[Guest]: going on.
[Guest]: There's spheres of creativity in non-traditional areas, but they are also likewise countervailing
[Guest]: forces that are more complicated, more depressing, more worrisome.
[Guest]: So India moves at different layers and different levels in different parts of the country.
[Guest]: So it's impossible to pass a generalization of what's happening.
[Guest]: Things are not as good, not as bad as they seem, just as they were not as bad, good as
[Guest]: they were some time ago, I would say this as a historian, I've said this before, but
[Guest]: I'm not in your shoes.
[Guest]: So I can say this again, the interim judgment that passed on what is happening today, or
[Guest]: what has been happening over the last three or four years, is that this is the fifth major
[Guest]: crisis the Republic has.
[Guest]: The first major crisis, probably the fourth, possibly the fifth.
[Guest]: The first major crisis was that of partition, which no one ever thought we could build a
[Guest]: nation from its fragments, and I mean, Granville Hauston's great history of the Constitution
[Guest]: says fundamental rights were being negotiated, debated, enacted against the atmosphere of
[Guest]: fundamental wrongs.
[Guest]: So the fact that India was united, had a democratic template, and had this extraordinary Constitution
[Guest]: was a coming out of that crisis.
[Guest]: And of course, I've written about that at great length in India after Gandhi.
[Guest]: The second crisis was a crisis caused by the China war, the Pakistan war of 62 and 65 respectively,
[Guest]: and the food, the agrarian shortages, the near famine situation, and of course, then
[Guest]: insurgencies in Mizoram and so on.
[Guest]: That was the second crisis.
[Guest]: The third crisis was the emergency, which everyone knows about.
[Guest]: The fourth crisis probably was the late 80s and early 90s, when you had rising caste and
[Guest]: communal tension.
[Guest]: Though in retrospect, it doesn't count as important as that, the first three.
[Guest]: And the fourth crisis, so let's leave the early 90s, is today, is the fourth major crisis
[Guest]: in the history of the republic.
[Guest]: So it's not unique, it's not unprecedented.
[Guest]: I've been thinking a lot about the other crises, the emergency I knew at first hand.
[Guest]: I grew up in the early 60s at a time of scarcities and shortages and the war with China.
[Guest]: And of course, I've spent many years studying the aftermath of partition.
[Guest]: And now I'm living through this fourth crisis.
[Guest]: That's how I would see it as a historian.
[Guest]: I will not be apocalyptic.
[Guest]: I'd be worried, occasionally despairing, but not apocalyptic, because we don't know what
[Guest]: will happen.
[Guest]: I'm worried about some other things.
[Guest]: I'll say I'm worried.
[Guest]: I'm not worried about some big thing like the survival of India or the loss of my India.
[Guest]: So I mean, I would not be apocalyptic.
[Guest]: And nor will I be nostalgic for the great India I grew up in, which I've lost, none
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: I'd be precise, identify it as a historian, as the fourth major crisis the republic has
[Guest]: passed through, and anatomize it as a sociologist by pointing to four or five particular aspects
[Guest]: of the current crisis.
[Guest]: First, the demonization of Muslims, who are really being turned into a permanently subjugated
[Guest]: minority almost like Dalits used to be.
[Guest]: That's the first thing.
[Guest]: In no particular order, but one this.
[Guest]: Secondly, the growing north-south divide.
[Guest]: The fact that the least prosperous parts of India are the ones that would have an increasing
[Guest]: share in our politics.
[Guest]: The least prosperous, the least open-minded, the more patriarchal, the more communal parts
[Guest]: of India will decide our democratic future.
[Guest]: Thirdly, the multiple environmental crises we face, which are actually serious enough
[Guest]: regardless of climate change to really pose a question mark about our economic future.
[Guest]: Fourthly, the decline in capability of institutions, which includes the press, the judiciary, the
[Guest]: public service.
[Guest]: And fifthly, our declining status in the neighborhood, the fact that we've lost the neighborhood.
[Guest]: So there are some particular aspects of what we're doing today that should worry us.
[Guest]: There may be one or two others that I've not talked about.
[Guest]: But that's why we have come through terrible times before.
[Guest]: Maybe we will and maybe we won't now.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I would ideally in the normal course of things have doubled down on that
[Amit Varma]: and spoken for just an hour on these profound points you made.
[Amit Varma]: But we have like 15 minutes left.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe the next time I'm in Bangalore, we can do a longer episode.
[Amit Varma]: I just have a couple of kind of more sort of questions for you.
[Amit Varma]: And one arises from your latest book, Rebels Against the Raj, which I'd encourage everyone
[Amit Varma]: to read is such fantastic storytelling, and I just learned a lot from it.
[Amit Varma]: But I want to sort of stick to one thing that strikes out and which you mentioned right
[Amit Varma]: at the start, that these seven people that you have profiled, were actually in a sense
[Amit Varma]: traitors, because they were fighting against their own country against the British Empire.
[Amit Varma]: But they were fighting for principles.
[Amit Varma]: They were fighting for human beings.
[Amit Varma]: They were driven both by principle and empathy.
[Amit Varma]: And we can look back at them and just admire them unhesitatingly.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the question comes to me is that what is sort of a modern analogue of
[Amit Varma]: that today, because it's so easy for people like you and me to just be called anti national
[Amit Varma]: because we are against one particular government.
[Amit Varma]: It would be equally you know, like, it would be equally it would be more easy for someone
[Amit Varma]: who says that who argues for Kashmir, or for the Northeast, and or who compares the Indian
[Amit Varma]: Army in Kashmir as an occupying force to being similar to what the British did to us.
[Amit Varma]: And I know many Kashmiris will look at us as a colonial occupying power.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly, and it seems natural to call them anti national, but to admire these fabulous,
[Amit Varma]: you know, foreigners you mentioned, for essentially the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, and how do we you know, is this something that sort of gives you cause for
[Guest]: pause in the sense?
[Guest]: I'll take a minor issue with the drawing a parallel with Kashmir.
[Guest]: Because in Kashmir, as I've written elsewhere, there are three sets of criminals, the Indian
[Guest]: state, the Pakistani state and the jihadis.
[Guest]: It's not black and white.
[Guest]: Agreed.
[Guest]: But there are victims.
[Guest]: There are victims.
[Guest]: The victims have been victims of the jihadis and as well as the Indian state.
[Guest]: You can argue that the Indian state has caused more violence than the jihadis.
[Guest]: But let's be clear about Kashmir is not what is called the freedom struggle in Kashmir
[Guest]: is not remotely comparable to the freedom struggle led by people like Gandhi.
[Guest]: But you know,
[Guest]: But with having said that, the Indian state is, as a citizen of India, I'm ashamed that
[Guest]: the crimes that the Indian state has committed, and continues to commit.
[Guest]: These crimes were committed and have been well documented by me before 2019.
[Guest]: And I will certainly go to document what happened after 2019.
[Guest]: So I think that's because, you know, again, we have to get beyond this black and white
[Guest]: stuff.
[Guest]: Kashmir is a very complicated business, you know, it's not something which is and I think
[Guest]: both sides in this debate, and this is partly but not wholly because of Twitter, have simplified
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: You know, I think the liberal left, and also, I'd say, the Kashmiri, proponents of Kashmiri
[Guest]: independence have never properly even understood, let alone atoned for the expulsion of the
[Guest]: police.
[Guest]: None of these excuses what the Indian state has done.
[Guest]: But I think that's where the nuance and complexity of Kashmir is important.
[Guest]: And I would, but I think with Muslims generally in India, there is no ambiguity, that what
[Guest]: is happening today to Muslims across India is truly awful.
[Guest]: It's unprecedented in the history of India.
[Guest]: It's like what the Burmese are doing to the Rohingyas, what Pakistan did to its Hindus
[Guest]: and Sikhs, what Bangladesh, it's maybe it's exactly that.
[Guest]: So that I think is very, very clear.
[Guest]: And people who are fighting for the equal rights of Muslims today, you know, Hindus
[Guest]: who are fighting for it, you know, like, you know, many mutual friends of ours who are
[Guest]: called anti-national all the time, you know, the Hindus who joined the anti-CIA protest,
[Guest]: the Muslims who participated in it, the women of Shaheen Bagh, the students of Jamia, Jamia
[Guest]: Melia, far from being anti-national, they were upholding the noblest ideals of the Indian
[Guest]: Republic.
[Guest]: You know, I think I was moved into protesting that day by what I saw, the brutalization
[Guest]: by the police of the students in Jamia Melia, which is a university which Gandhi had created.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And so, absolutely.
[Guest]: So I would, I think Kashmir requires itself, but what is happening to Indian Muslims today
[Guest]: outside of Kashmir is despicable and anyone with a shred of decency should be standing
[Guest]: up against what the Modi Shah regime is doing to Indian Muslims today.
[Guest]: That I would say clearly, and they are upholding the noblest ideals of the Republic and let
[Guest]: them be called all the kinds of names they want.
[Guest]: The CIA, as I wrote at the time, is immoral, illegal, immoral, as well as illegal and totally
[Guest]: awful and absolutely discriminatory piece of legislation.
[Guest]: So, you know, I think that particularly is something on which every Indian has to take
[Amit Varma]: a stand.
[Guest]: I couldn't agree with you more on the CIA.
[Guest]: We're thinking Indian has to take a stand on our treatment, but what is happening in
[Guest]: my state today with the kind of public disrobing of Muslim women who want to be educated?
[Amit Varma]: What could be more awful than this?
[Amit Varma]: No, and I couldn't agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: And I did an episode on the CIA with Srinath Raghavan also, which is one of the top three
[Amit Varma]: downloaded episodes.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll link that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: But about Kashmir, I was acknowledging the complexity rather than taking a simple line
[Amit Varma]: and pointing out that for a 12-year-old kid there, whose 15-year-old brother was taken
[Amit Varma]: away and killed by the army or by the security forces rather, and whose 14-year-old sister
[Amit Varma]: was blinded because of those pellets, there's no point talking to him about what was done
[Guest]: to Kashmiri pundits 30 years ago.
[Guest]: I agree, but at least the intellectuals should.
[Guest]: At least the intellectuals, the Kashmiri intellect, the Kashmiri novelists, they should, they
[Guest]: should.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I'm not asking the 12-year-old or 14-year-old who are suffering from the security forces
[Guest]: violence to do that.
[Guest]: But I think the intellectuals who are famous and have a voice never do.
[Guest]: I think that is what complicates it.
[Amit Varma]: That's what really complicates our discussion on this.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier we spoke about the passage of time.
[Guest]: I'll send you a link also.
[Guest]: I wrote a column which came after, I wrote several columns after the abrogation of C70.
[Guest]: One was called the multiple tragedies of the Kashmiri pundit, which came in the Hindustan
[Guest]: times.
[Guest]: And that explains the complexity to the extent possible, you can do in a newspaper article.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier we discussed the passage of time and how when you look at time differently, you
[Amit Varma]: can look at history differently.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the ways in which I think that applies is, you know, is the whole concept
[Amit Varma]: of the nation state, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I recorded an episode with Nirupa Maharau yesterday, which will actually come out well
[Amit Varma]: after yours.
[Amit Varma]: But that was one of the things we discussed because she spoke about how there were Tibetan
[Amit Varma]: maps, which would not show those kinds of boundaries, which would not recognize a boundary
[Amit Varma]: that divides a mountain or a valley or a river or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: The point being that culture unites us and these arbitrary lines drawn on maps, then
[Amit Varma]: become a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And from this perspective, when we you know, we today we think of nation states as hardened
[Amit Varma]: things.
[Amit Varma]: This is a map.
[Amit Varma]: This is the definitive line.
[Amit Varma]: This is where we are.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, in the vast sweep of history doesn't necessarily have to be like that.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier, you, for example, mentioned the divide between the north and the south.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if when when delimitation comes up again, for example, that is something that
[Amit Varma]: could explode.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think like one of the points that you made in India after Gandhi was that something
[Amit Varma]: that we take for granted is actually miraculous, the fact that the center held, right?
[Amit Varma]: And we could just have splintered and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe there's another counterfactual where that would have been a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: But the center held and we are what we are, but it's not something we should take for
[Amit Varma]: granted.
[Amit Varma]: So this has happened with hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: It looks solidified.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that we also, you know, if you're looking 50 or 100 years down the line, do
[Amit Varma]: you think that the influence in this globalized and connected world, that nation states which
[Amit Varma]: have not been around for very long, if you look at the sweep of history, may not necessarily
[Guest]: be so relevant or so powerful?
[Guest]: You know, it's impossible to foretell.
[Guest]: You know, I think historians make very bad astrologers.
[Guest]: And I made some disastrous predictions in the past about how elections would go.
[Guest]: So it's impossible to foretell.
[Guest]: But for the moment, you have nation states.
[Guest]: And you have to work within them.
[Guest]: I have India after Gandhi ends some lines from J. B. S. Haldane, explaining why he's
[Guest]: not a world citizen, but an Indian citizen, right?
[Guest]: And I'm not a world citizen, I'm an Indian citizen.
[Guest]: And one of the duties of an Indian citizen, to paraphrase Haldane, one of the duties of
[Guest]: a citizen is to hold his state to account and to criticize it for its excesses and its
[Guest]: misconduct, and that's what all of us should be doing, who see ourselves as Indian citizens.
[Guest]: What will happen 20-50 years later, will you have porous boundaries and so on?
[Guest]: At the moment, the treatment of our religious minorities is unconscionable.
[Guest]: The capture and subjugation of our institutions, the will of a particular party and a particular
[Guest]: leader have very dangerous portents for our economic and social and political future.
[Guest]: The deteriorating relationship with the neighborhood, for example, again, this will be a subject
[Guest]: for a different discussion, and it should be someone like Srinath Raghavan or Nirupama
[Guest]: Rao who can do more justice to it, or Shiv Shankar Menon, perhaps best of all, who could
[Guest]: do more justice to this.
[Guest]: One of the tragedies of Indian foreign policy, which the Modi government has compounded,
[Guest]: is our relationship with our smaller neighbors.
[Guest]: There are deep historical reasons why we have bad relations with Pakistan and China.
[Guest]: But to the contrary, there are historical and cultural reasons why we should have good
[Guest]: relations with Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Bangladesh, and we do not.
[Guest]: Now, these are things we should all be working towards.
[Guest]: But I'm not someone who thinks about a distant future in a utopian world where there will
[Guest]: be no nation states.
[Guest]: I live in a world of nation states.
[Guest]: I have a government which I must hold to account.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when you say I'm an Indian citizen, we're both Indian citizens.
[Amit Varma]: But I think legally, we are Indian citizens.
[Amit Varma]: Morally, I don't feel constrained by the nation state.
[Amit Varma]: Or empathetically, I don't feel constrained by it.
[Amit Varma]: And when that becomes a constraint, when somebody within your nation state is your person and
[Amit Varma]: somebody else is another, or somebody within whatever artificial tribe you draw within
[Amit Varma]: it is, you know, that kind of sort of gives me pause.
[Amit Varma]: My final question is something which will bookend the discussion.
[Amit Varma]: We started by speaking about your notion of home.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll end with this little quote from a Nisam Ezekiel poem, which I know you love,
[Amit Varma]: where he says, quote, I have made my commitments now.
[Amit Varma]: This is one to stay where I am, as others choose to give themselves in some remote and
[Amit Varma]: backward place.
[Amit Varma]: My backward place is where I am.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And I find this very moving.
[Amit Varma]: And what is your backward place?
[Guest]: It is all of the Indian Republic.
[Guest]: It's not a, I mean, it's the home is, home is, of course, there are now Bangalore, but
[Guest]: it's just, I mean, I'm too attached to this country.
[Guest]: And you know, I'll be have to be, it's hard for me to think whatever happens to it.
[Guest]: You know, do what I can, write whatever books I still have to write, I'll get angry when
[Guest]: I have to, I'll tweet when I have to, I'll go on a dharna when I need to, but that's
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not a, again, I give a lecture in memory of Justice Sunanda Bhandare, which
[Guest]: was then published later, but it's also available on YouTube, it was called Patriotism vs Jingoism.
[Guest]: So I'm an Indian patriot.
[Guest]: I'm not a Jingoist, I'm an Indian patriot.
[Guest]: And I have no hesitation in saying that, I mean, that's where I was born.
[Guest]: And if I had been born somewhere else and raised somewhere else in a different kind
[Guest]: of environment, with different kinds of influences, I may have been a Katalan patriot or a Kashmiri
[Guest]: patriot or whatever else, you know, that's it.
[Guest]: So that's, you know, that's how I am.
[Guest]: That's the backward place where I am.
[Guest]: It is backward, it is divided, it is brutal.
[Guest]: It could be despotic, but it's my place.
[Amit Varma]: Ram, thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: And next time, you've got to give me four or five hours of your time, because as you
[Amit Varma]: can see, there is so much to discuss.
[Guest]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: That's the most enjoyable.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.